---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Autism Profiles for Children
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: Jul 30, 2021, 4:12 PM
image: /assets/blog/Aspiedent2021.png
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/Aspiedent2021.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: Post diagnostic support for children with autism is well-known to be difficult to obtain. Not only that, but it is not always at all helpful. Aspiedent have a solution - Autism profiling. There are many underlying reasons why a child may struggle with any one autism symptom. This blog post discusses helping autistic children by figuring out and targeting their underlying autism issues. These underlying issues cause their autism symptoms, so doing it this way means that the child can become best equipped to reach their potential.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
---
**Thumbnail image: **

**Image credit**:

**Thumbnail title:** Autism Profiles for Children

**Thumbnail description:** Post diagnostic support for children with
autism is well-known to be difficult to obtain. Not only that, but it is
not always at all helpful. Aspiedent have a solution: Autism profiling.
There are many underlying reasons why a child may struggle with any one
autism symptom. This blog post discusses helping autistic children by
figuring out and targeting their underlying autism issues. These
underlying issues cause their autism symptoms, so doing it this way
means that the child can become best equipped to reach their potential.

**SEO (Meta) Title:** Post diagnostic support for autistic children:
Autism profiling.

**SEO (Meta) Description:** Post diagnostic support for children with
autism: Autism profiling. Aspiedent explains the importance and benefits
of Autism profiles for children with autism.

Autism Profiles for Children
============================

Autism Profiles for Children

After Autism diagnosis support: The Importance of Profiling the Autism
of a child

A relatively quick and appropriately costed [autism
profile](https://aspiedent.com/index.php/blog/autism-profiling-tool-introduction) for your child with autism or other form of
neurodiversity, after diagnosis, can save a child (who will grow up to
be an adult), decades of heartache, frustration, and mental health
problems.

At Aspiedent, we do not do autism or any other diagnoses. We help people
understand the underlying issues causing their symptoms so that the
right support is in place to help a child reach their maximum potential.

What's the difference between an autism profile and a diagnosis? A
diagnosis might state a child struggles with change, for example. But
what it does not tell you (usually) is the underlying cause for this
difficulty with change.

There are many potential underlying issues for a single autism symptom.
What the underlying cause is, is key to how to deal with it. One of the
most common examples I give, is 'struggles with change'.

There are many different underlying reasons for why a child or adult may
struggle with change. Two of these many underlying issues could be:

a.  because they have poor 'executive functioning', therefore they
    struggle to shift their attention (for example) from one thing to
    another.

b.  Because they have slow processing compared to the general
    population, and therefore take longer to understand and adjust to
    the change. Their classmates are moving forward while the child with
    slow processing is still trying to work out what is going on.

The list could go on...

Both of the above examples can cause anxiety.

However, the difference is the first issue (executive functioning) can
be improved, and we would advise on exercises to build up this skill.

The second is a fundamental issue which will not change -- therefore we
would suggest aids and strategies to minimise the problems caused by
this issue.

Until we know what the underlying cause is, we are making stabs in the
dark and causing (preventable) problems!

I can't express to you how long the list of different examples of
underlying issues and outward symptoms is, and how to deal with them,
is. (It's our autism profiling tool).

Up until recently, we did autism profiles (aka workplace assessments) on
adults, and the youngest we had done was 16. We did not know if it would
work for children.

However, recently we were contacted in desperation by two Mothers, both
of 11-year-olds, who are finishing primary school and starting secondary
school. Well actually, one has given up on going to school together --
but would normally be starting secondary school.

Both of these children have a diagnosis and have had a battery of tests
from specialists, such as educational psychologists.

We were provided with a lot of information about the children in the
form of various assessment reports. All we have to do is to ask the
mother a few supplementary questions in order to fill in the gaps.

Given this information, it was not all that difficult to work out what
the underlying issues for each child are. Having worked this out,
everything fell into place for the parents.

The frustrating thing is that the bulk of the information was already
there, it is just that none of the professionals involved had managed to
join the dots.

For example, the educational psychologist had worked out that the first
child has slow processing. However, it appears they were unable to work
out that if a child has slow processing, but is still managing to score
in the average range, then that child must actually be more intelligent
than the raw scores suggest!

The educational psychologist was also unable to work out the impact on
school and everyday life that slow processing was causing.

For example, the educational psychologist seemed unable to work out that
slow processing will impact on social interaction, and that this impact
would get worse as social interaction becomes more complex as the child
in question's peers mature.

In short, the report that was supposed to help the mother and the school
with working with the child and educating them, was little more than a
description of the results. There was very little interpretation -- that
was up to the reader. But most, if not all, laypeople are unable to
understand what the various tests are supposed to measure!

One assessor had worked out a basic 'sensory profile' for the child and
the school were doing their best to accommodate. But there was not a
hint of understanding of the impact of this on social interaction and
the inability to join in with activities that peers enjoyed such as
dancing and acrobatics.

The school provided coloured overlays to help one of the children read,
but there was no suggested assessment for [Irlen
lenses](https://irlen.com/), even though it was clear that reading the
board was a problem for the child.

To be fair, though, Irlen lenses are expensive and not something the
school should be expected to provide.

But overall, we would hope for a much better service from well paid
professionals such as educational psychologists.

The second child mentioned, has given up on school altogether. She got
funding to go to an autism specific special school, but they did not
know how to deal with her either. Aspiedent are now her last hope. She
came with even more reports by assorted professionals, who also have not
managed to join the dots.

In this case, this is an extremely intelligent child who just happens to
not be able to process visual information and auditory information both
at the same time. This is actually pretty much stated in one of the
reports.

This is the reason why this child cannot read and write, although she
wants to be able to do so -- but none of the professionals have been
able to work this out.

Just stop and think: reading and writing is taught via both visual and
auditory information given at the same time.

This child had no way of telling her teachers what the problem was and
was therefore labelled with PDA (Pathological Demand Avoidance) simply
because she distracted the teacher when she could not do something no
matter how hard she tried, and could not explain why not.

It is no wonder that autistic children are failed by the education
system. We deal with many autistic adults who have been failed by the
education system. Now we are seeing first-hand how and why it all goes
wrong for them.

In a nutshell, nobody has managed to fully understand these children
because they are not able to work out the underlying issues which cause
the symptoms. It goes wrong early on and sometimes there are
inappropriate interventions.

Our experience with these children both of whom qualify for an
Educational Health Care Plan (EHCP) has been a real eye opener.

The EHCPs we have seen are completely unwieldy. They contain quotes from
numerous reports, but do not even attempt to structure these into a
coherent description that makes sense. They are disjointed.

Add to this an apparently random set of 'reasonable adjustments' that
the school is expected to make and it is no wonder that education goes
wrong for so many autistic children!

The reasonable adjustments tend to be standard with little regard as to
whether they are likely to help the child or not. So for example, there
is a lot of talk of 'social skills training' with no regard as to what
kind of social skills training would be appropriate, or if the child is
likely to benefit from it.

What is the point of teaching facial expression if the child's
processing is so slow that there is no way a child could make use of
this training during conversation?

As mentioned above, this is a non-exhaustive description of the issues
we have found with diagnosis reports, educational psychologist reports,
speech and language assessments and educational health care plans.

Having an Aspiedent autism profile could change the path of a child's
life beyond belief. I have seen first-hand how it has changed adult's
lives, even if they are having to unpick all the misunderstandings from
the past.

It would be our dream to offer these profiles for every child who has
additional needs or symptoms which could not be explained by other
issues such as attachment issues or trauma. However, at the moment we
have to charge parents for this which creates a barrier to real,
effective, positive change for their child.

For Linkedin: If you think an autism profile is something you would
benefit from knowing more about, please reach out to me (Jen) at
<j.blacow@aspiedent.com> or on 07717 404846.

For Website: If you think an autism profile is something you would
benefit from knowing more about, contact us at <info@aspiedent.com> or
on 07717 404846.
