---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Identity, Discrimination and Autism
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile', 'activist', 'mental health']
date: 17th July 2021
image: IdentityAutism.png
thumbnail: IdentityAutism.jpg
metaTitle: Identity, Discrimination and Autism
metaDescription: Aspiedent highlight some of the reasons why we do not believe autism & identity politics mix well and vents some frustrations about the topics of identity and discrimination.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: Although there is always space for Activism, Aspiedent try to stay away from political ideologies in relation to autism. Identity politics in particular is sometimes referred to regarding autism and the experience of being autistic. This blog post highlights some of the reasons why we do not believe autism & identity politics mix well and vents some frustrations about the topics of identity and discrimination.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
creditURL: https://pixabay.com/users/gdj-1086657/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2750393
creditText: Image by Gordon Johnson
---
This is possibly the most personal post I have ever written. Some may
think it's controversial, but I only want open-minded debate and healthy
discussion. 

What is identity? I suppose to me it is how you would define yourself
and your role in society. 

For some, I am sure it is more about their heritage, their profession,
or their socio-economic status. Many I know do not even seem to consider
it (not because they are privileged, but because they worry about other
things instead). Maybe some do not think about it because they are
'privileged' enough to not have to think about how their identity
affects them. 

One can most likely have lots of 'identities'. For example, the very
same person can identify as a woman, a mother, a lawyer, and a sufferer
of Inflammatory bowel disease. 

The Cambridge dictionary definition of identity is as follows:

*Identity is defined as "who a person is, or the qualities of a person or group that make them different from others".*

Somebody recently highlighted to me that perhaps I had not bothered to
change my Maiden name (Blacow) to my married name (Hughes), because it
was part of my identity. This triggered me to do a little reading around
identity.* *As my work is centred around autism & neurodiversity, I also
read a bit about autism & identity. 

Much I read (and I will be honest, I did not look too far) seemed to be
about people whose identity was marginalised, or who identified with
being 'marginalised'. Therefore, they felt strongly about fighting for
'justice'. For example, fighting with 'society', or fighting against the
'people in power'. 

Then I started getting more and more frustrated because I could not find
any concrete evidence of this current day marginalisation and
discrimination. You know, the things that people who identified as
marginalised (or their friends) were fighting against.

NB: I am NOT saying discrimination does not exist. But that there is a
lot more noise about discrimination than I see discrimination. Whether
it is because it is the way that things are presented or because of the
censorship of discriminatory abuse, I don't know. 

But it seems we are relying on the mainstream media, and other various
influencers, to tell us these various modes of discrimination still
exist and are rife. 

It would probably be argued by these people that, that is because I am
blind to my 'privilege'. 

Except that does not work because I am technically disabled, I am a
woman, and my family was pretty much working class. My Mother's DNA,
family name (Goree), family history, and my skin tone evidence that I am
a direct descendant of West African slaves. 

TLDR: I see more people complaining about discrimination than I actually
see or experience discrimination. But I am also a target for
discrimination, so I cannot be too 'blind' to it. What is going on?

**Then I looked up the notion of 'Identity politics'.**

I believe that there is nothing wrong with identity in general. But
where I get worried is when it moves into the realm of 'identity
politics'. 

According to Wikipedia, identity politics is a political approach
wherein people of a particular
gender, [religion](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Religion), [race](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Race_(human_categorization)), [social
background](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Socioeconomic_status), [class](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Social_class) or
other identifying factor develop political agendas based around one or
more of these categories.

If this is the case, then I start to wonder about how the conversation
about discrimination benefits people. 

Could it be that being a victim gives people extreme gratification that
makes them feel much better about themselves? 

Is it that the elite (or the rich and powerful) have seen that to
influence people, you have to tap into their identity and make them
believe that their sense of self is being exploited by others?

Is it also to push those who are not affected by so-called protected
characteristics into believing a narrative that others from them are
being marginalised? 

Is it that on the surface the response to this looks good (e.g.
anti-discrimination campaigns, privileged people being encouraged to
'check' their privilege), but this response is only designed to push
certain political agendas on all people through the back door? 

There is also the phenomenon of virtue signalling. This is when we do
outwardly good deeds or talk about our moral values to increase our
social status and give us a sense of self-satisfaction. For example,
many people change their Facebook profile photos in support of a cause
when something tragic happens in the world. I am unsure as to how many
people do anything to help beyond that. Some argue that these little
acts of virtue signalling make it less likely for us to do something of
substance to help said cause. 

Or it is that we are truly living in a horrifically discriminatory world
that is just getting worse and worse?

**Autism and Identity**

Based on the definition of identity, there is a lot written about autism
and identity. This is strange as although autistic people experience the
world significantly differently from others, they are still human beings
with relatable human experiences.

However, what also does not make sense *is *the fact that people with
autism are often so different from each other. 

I get that you can identify as someone who likes playing Tennis. But
when you play a sport like Tennis, you generally play by the same rules.
Granted, you might like Tennis for a different reason to the next
person. But generally, Tennis is pretty consistent. 

As is outlined at point 2 below, we recently met an autistic adult who
was upset because the service that was once helping him had become too
politically minded and he felt excluded by this.

He has pretty much ended up back under Aspiedent's umbrella because he
recognised our way of helping individuals with autism was conducive to
moving people forwards and not holding on to them to justify more
funding from the government. 

This is why I feel linking identity to politics, especially regarding
autism (only because is what I am focusing on in this blog post) is
dangerous. Here are some more reasons: 

1\. If everybody with autism is so vastly different (which they are) how
can somebody 'identify' as autistic? What are the criteria to identify
as autistic? Surely for any political movement for people with autism
that is of any use, everyone would need to be affected the same way.

2\. People who 'identify' as autistic and set the political agendas for
autistic people, risk marginalising other autistic people. Many autistic
people do not want to be defined or identified at all by their autism,
or do not think the same way as 'identifying autistics'. They will not
have a voice in these agendas. 

3\. As mentioned earlier, some people with autism do not even realise or
can realise that there is such a political discussion around autism &
identity and just go about their lives as best they can. Their world
bears no resemblance to some of the autistic activists pushing this
stuff. 

4. If you can 'self-identify' as autistic, you might not actually have
autism and therefore will only wreak havoc on autism research and the
'autism community'. We need to be careful of this. 

5\. Creating a political agenda for autism & neurodiversity will and does
marginalise many autistic people and can prevent them from reaching
their potential (something Aspiedent is focused on). They may become
stuck in an echo chamber of their ideas and ultimately participate less
in society. Participating in wider society is what I assume is part of
the goal as they care about equal rights and treatment. If not, why not
just make your own society and live by those rules?

There are more... 

Again, this does not just go for autism, but probably for all protected
characteristics. It is a bit similar in mental health. Sadly, some
people seem to take on certain mental health conditions as their
identity, and then they never move forward. People get scared if they
are not 'ill', they will not be looked after or loved.

 Although some people cannot recover from some mental health conditions,
you can still move on in life and live a fulfilling life. You can have
other identities whilst battling mental health conditions or diagnoses.
You just have to accept that some things are really tough for you, and
most people will not understand what you go through (much like you may
never understand their struggles). 

I suppose the point of this blog post is to release some of my recent
frustration around all things bandwagon and political. Anybody who knows
me will hopefully agree that discrimination against people for ANY
reason or difference is so far away from my nature that to perceive this
blog post as such, would be ridiculous. 

I am not saying that anybody is wrong or right or that any approach to
tackling discrimination is fully wrong. I am saying that I do not see
some of the approaches to tackling unfairness and injustice in the world
as always helpful. In fact, in some cases, they can be harmful and the
opposite of inclusive. 

If you want to ask questions or discuss anything in this blog post,
please e-mail Jen at <j.blacow@aspiedent.com>.
