---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Autism and Self-employment
tag: movie
date: 2021-05-17
image: /social.jpg
author: Jen Blacow
authorImage: /jen.jpg
description: Which Treats of the Character and Pursuits of the Famous Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha
---
**Autism and Self-employment **

**What type of 'autism profiles' would be good at self-employment?**

A lot of people I speak to with autism tell me that they would or do
struggle to be self-employed because they struggle to 'market' or 'sell
themselves'. Although this is no doubt more true for people with
aspergers, it is by no means not abnormal for everyone.

Actually, I don't think you need any particular autism profile: you just
need to be good at what you do and self-motivated to get work done.

If you choose your profession well, autism may provide an advantage in
actually carrying out the work to a good standard -- but only if the
profession is well chosen. But it may also not provide an advantage.

It all depends on your particular profile. So Charlie is good because
she is good at discrete processes as long as she does something that
involves discrete processes she will be fine. Charlie says sales is a
process (and so do you -- you are also good at processes)

In fact... getting people to do the hard bits. Main thing is you ae good
at what you do and self motivated. That's the reason a lot of non
autistic people don't become self employed -- you need self motivation.
EG example.

People who are very good at following processes but struggle socially
might be good at the partner incentive models such as utility warehouse
(seem to find a lot of people with autism doing this).

Also the legal studio.

If you are good at processes, it is easier. If not, you need help to
implement your ideas intomprocess.. like EG.

I am good at the research side of what we do. I am able to teach. I
appear to have a gift for making complex stuff easy to understand. But
there is lots of stuff that I am not good at and which I have to leave
for you.

Those who did not struggle particularly with cognitive difficulties
(executive functioning), severe processing issues, or additional
learning difficulties. Those who are 'intact' inside but struggle with
movement may be OK.

Some people would need support some will not.

The support network around self employed people is important. If you can
do your job but not the paperwork associated with it, do you know
somebody who can do that for you?

**Challenges **

Getting the right business support (our experiences with this) ATW is a
nightmare.

Not being taken for granted

Networking is tough -- Networking -- difficult for everyone. Terrifying
for many autistic people. Complete non starter for others who simply
have little or no idea how to interact with 'unsuspecting' strangers.
but I know people who do, do it (and we've found a way around it --
information gathering exercises)

Conflict resolution, difficulties with unfairness and politics

In our case, not be taken seriously by other organisations who work with
autistic people. Finding other professionals struggle to treat me as an
equal -- the example of me being ignored but when someone else comes up
with the same idea everyone else runs with it is very illustrative.

Strangely, the employers we work with -- especially construction -- had
no difficulty in treating me as an equal.

The challenges come when there is an aspect of running a business is
completely incompatible with how the autistic person thinks.

Dealing with customers and conflict is difficult for many people, but Ed
loved it. Dealing with people is ok for many autistic people if the
interaction is structured.

Can be difficult to get enough social interaction if you are working by
yourself -- some autistic people need that social interaction.

Understanding customer needs. This is a big issues for me because my way
of thinking is just too different. I just cannot see things from the
customer's point of view -- much too logical and nowhere near enough
emotion.

**Benefits**

Control working environment

-   Work when it suits

-   Rest when needed - not sure this one is working for me at the moment

-   Choose who you work with? Choose to work completely on your own?

-   Less office politics

-   Control the sensory environment

Specialise in certain area

Teach and coach others

In fact, if you choose your profession well (and that is key), autism
may provide an advantage in that they will be provide an advantage.

**An autism business network?**

This has got legs, but must be done right

Autistic/disabled people helping each other with their strengths and
weaknesses

I think more of a loose professional network where people can work
together on projects. Similar to how people in construction work: when
they need younger people to help out on a site, they have a list of
people they can call on.

Also those who are good at the business support side, helping those who
struggle with this.

This is not actually a new idea (many businesses buy in services instead
of doing it in house): it is just that autistic people are safer for
other autistic people to deal with.

The support network around self employed people is important. If you can
do your job but not the paperwork associated with it, do you know
somebody who can do that for you?

**Thumbnail image:** AutismSelfEmployment

**Image credit:**    Image
by [Mediamodifier](https://pixabay.com/users/mediamodifier-1567646/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=5597527) from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=5597527) 

**Thumbnail title:** Autism Self Employment

**Thumbnail description:** A lot of people with autism feel they would
or do struggle with self-employment. However, there are many ways that
autism self employment could work. Arguably the most important thing for
successful business people is self motivation, skill, and an excellent
support network.

**SEO (Meta) Title**: Autism Self employment

**SEO (Meta) Description:** Aspiedent discusses Autism self employment
pros, cons, and attributes required for successful business people.

**Title:** Autism Self Employment

**Would people with autism be good at self-employment?**

A lot of people with autism tell me that they would, or do, struggle to
be self-employed. This is often because they struggle to market
themselves or sell themselves. Although this is no doubt often true for
people with Aspergers or autism, it is by no means just autistic people
who struggle with selling themselves.

The main thing both people with and without autism need to be
successfully self-employed is to be good at what they do and very
self-motivated to get work done. That is the reason a lot of
non-autistic people do not become self-employed either -- you need
self-motivation.

But having people do the bits you struggle with can alleviate this
problem.

What some people with autism overlook (perhaps because of social
difficulties or extremely different ways of thinking and doing things)
is the fact that many people who are not autistic outsource many parts
of their business they either have no interest in or frankly just cannot
do.

For example, Aspiedent's Autism Training & Consultancy Director Dr
Elizabeth Guest is autistic. She is excellent at the research side of
what we do. She can teach. She has a gift for making complex stuff easy
to understand. This makes her extremely good at many parts of running
the business. But there is lots of stuff that she is not good at (many
of which are people-related) and which I do instead.

Luckily, our strengths and weaknesses complement each other well.

It all depends on your particular profile, too. We know an autistic
businessperson who is good because she is strong at discrete processes.
As long as she does something that involves discrete processes she will
be fine running her business.

If you are an autistic person who is poor at processes, you need someone
that can help you implement your ideas and help you with day to day
running of the business.

Those with autism who do not struggle particularly with severe cognitive
difficulties, severe processing issues, or additional learning
difficulties will generally be able to find a way to be successfully
self-employed if they are determined enough to do it.

The support network around self-employed people is important. If you can
do your job (i.e. web programming) to an extremely high standard, but
not the paperwork associated with setting it up as a business, do you
know somebody who can do that for you?

**Challenges for the self-employed autistic person**

Business support is critical when you are a self-employed autistic
person, however getting the right support can be extremely challenging.

For example, the process of applying for Access to Work, the Department
for Work and Pensions' programme for disabled people in employment,
which we discussed in [another
blog](https://aspiedent.com/index.php/blog/access-to-work), can be
(ironically) really difficult to access.

We have also found that mainstream business support programmes have
worked less for us due to our unique ways of thinking and doing things.
Understanding customer need is a big issue for Elizabeth, our Director,
because her way of thinking is just too different. She just cannot see
things from the customer's point of view -- she is much too logical and
does not understand buyer behaviour in terms of emotions.

**Politics **

In our case, being an autism-run organisation can result in us not being
taken seriously by other organisations that work with autistic people.
We have found some other professionals struggle to treat Elizabeth as an
equal. I have witnessed Elizabeth coming up with an idea that has been
dismissed as too 'extreme' by a group forum, yet when another
professional came up with the very same idea some years later, the forum
thought the idea was the best thing since sliced bread.

I do suspect that this is partly because Elizabeth, being autistic, does
not have the socio-political influence and the contacts and skills to
make the 'idea' happen. However, this is a perfect example of how a
non-autistic businessperson with lots of business acumen and a socially
awkward genius with original ideas can become a power team. If this
person had teamed up with Elizabeth years ago, perhaps the idea could
have become a reality years ago.

Strangely, the employers we work with -- especially in the construction
sector -- have no difficulty in treating Elizabeth as an equal. Perhaps
this is because they think in similar ways. Either that or they do not
see the autism so clearly and therefore don't automatically get worried
she is 'too wacky'.

Being taken for granted is a risk which many autistic people need to be
aware of. The helpful and naive nature of some autistic people can lead
them into trouble with other ruthless and cutthroat businesspeople.

Dealing with customers and conflict is difficult for all businesses.
However, for autistic businesspeople, dealing with conflict and
confrontation can be harder than it is for the general population. As is
dealing with unfairness and politics.

That said, we know an autistic professional who loved helping his
clients with conflict resolution. In general, dealing with people is OK
for many autistic people if the interaction is structured.

Dealing with confrontation requires good social skills and fast
processing of the information that is coming at them. This is why as an
autistic self-employed person it is important to have a supportive and
trusted network around you to help with these things.

**Networking **

Networking is difficult for everyone, but it is terrifying for many
autistic people. For some, it is a complete non-starter as they simply
have little or no idea how to interact with 'unsuspecting' strangers.
That being said, I know autistic people that are prolific networkers. I
suspect those are the autistic people who are hypo-sensitive to emotions
(hence do not get upset by 'rejection') and who have learned the process
of networking and are excellent at following through with this process
which then feeds into the sales process.

Some people, like us, have had to find a way around networking. For
example, when I do not know how to approach my networking attempts or
which angle to take, I start by using networking as an 'information
gathering exercise'. I prepare 3 or 4 key questions to ask people in the
room to structure my interactions, start conversations and learn about
the people I am networking with (this can even be used as market
research).

I think although perhaps scarier for autistic people, networking is all
the more important for them. It can also be difficult to get enough
social interaction if you are working by yourself. As with non-autistic
people, many autistic people need social interaction.

In essence, the challenges to running a business with autism come when
there is an aspect of running the business that is completely
incompatible with how the autistic person thinks.

**Why could self-employment suit some (autistic) people better?**

Since autism often causes difficulties with things non-autistic people
find easier, like dealing with small talk, commuting on a busy train to
work, or 'office politics', an advantage of being self-employed is that
you can control your working environment. For example, choosing to work
fully from home or deciding when to come into the office to deal with
other people.

This also relates to being able to control the 'sensory' environment. If
being in an office causes difficulties due to hypersensitivities or
social chit chat, choosing your own space to work in can be a complete
game-changer for the better.

Being able to work when it suits you best is also an advantage. We have
met an autistic IT professional who got most of his best work done
between 10 pm and 1 am when the 'world had gone to sleep'.

Being in charge also allows you to rest when needed. This does not
always work for self-employed people, but the key thing here is that it
is ultimately up to them if they want to work. Nobody else is going to
penalise them for taking an afternoon or a couple of days off. They are
not controlled by others (apart from customers, arguably).

Self-employment also comes with more control over who you do and do not
work with. If you are very good at what you do, you can choose your
customers.

If you choose your profession well (and that is key), autism may provide
an advantage in that the 'spiky profile' associated with autism (being
poor at certain things but excellent at others) can be a massive asset.
Specialising in something you excel at will make it easier for you to
sell that service to other businesses.

**An autism business network?**

An autism/neurodiversity or even disability business network has always
been something that has appealed to us. Not because we think people with
autism or neurodiversity should simply network with themselves or set up
a special 'club'. But because it could be a great way to pool together
skills, support each other, and help each other out.

As mentioned above, often there are major strengths within autism that
can be used to help those who have a major weakness in an area. If the
network were open to people with physical disabilities too, what they
might bring in terms of help with the social side of things could be
invaluable for autistic people.

This has got potential, but it must be done right. It could be a loose
professional network where people can work together on projects. Those
who are good at the business support side can help those who struggle
with it. Those good at the technical aspects of running a business could
help those who are not skilled in those areas.

This is not a new idea (many businesses buy in services instead of doing
it in-house): it is just that autistic people are safer for other
autistic people to deal with. They do not need to worry about getting
the social bit wrong and autistic people generally struggle to tell
lies.

Ultimately, the support network around self-employed people is of utmost
importance. Running your own business when you are autistic can be done,
aided by lots of self-motivation, skill in what you do, and the correct
input where you are weakest.

**For website:** If you would like some support in working out how to be
self-employed despite neurodiversity, please [contact
us]/\*contactusform/\* or call 07717 404846.

**For LinkedIn:** If you would like some support in working out how to
be self-employed despite neurodiversity, please contact us at
<info\@aspiedent.com> or on 07717 404846.
