---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Is Autism a Disorder or a Difference?
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: Jul 2, 2020, 2:40 PM
image: /assets/blog/AutismDisorderDifference.jpg
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/AutismDisorderDifference.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: The answer to whether autism is disorder or a difference; a superpower, or a disability, is not straightforward. For some people it is clearly a disorder, for some a difference and for some, it is both.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
---
**Is Autism a Disorder or a Difference? Superpower or Disability?**

Jen Blacow Operations Manager, Aspiedent CIC

The answer to this is not clear and it is a huge debate.

A simplified view of the neurodiversity movement is that it is a
'difference' not a disorder and that any disability is as a result of
the lack of accommodation, tolerance, acceptance of society. Greta
Thunberg has stated that her autism is a "superpower".

Then there are parents of children with 'severe autism' who are up in
arms about this and who are claiming that autism is a severe disability.
Blogs can be found on the internet regarding just how challenging their
children are.

This has resulted in a lot of animosity between the two groups.

The truth lies somewhere in the middle and varies from individual to
individual and from circumstance to circumstance.

Each person's autism is different, with a different combination of
underlying issues. Under some circumstances, autism can be a useful
difference, but in others it is a very real disability -- a disorder if
you like. The same autistic trait can be both a curse and a blessing
depending on the situation. Sometimes, a coping strategy to overcome a
difficulty, works to the autistic person's advantage in making them
excel at what they do.

Perhaps we need a discussion of what a disorder is. Are impairments
disorders?

So let's consider a few traits.

There are autistic people, who like the majority of the population have
a strong desire to connect emotionally with people and to fit it. Can
you imagine the frustration and distress this causes when their autism
prevents them from meeting this need for various reasons? Is it any
wonder that many of these people are bitter at society and depressed? In
this circumstance, the social communication difficulties that come with
autism are really quite disabling.

On the other had there are autistic people who have a much reduced
desire to connect emotionally and fit in. Some of these will be unable
to connect emotionally and therefore won't know what they are missing.
It is possible for these people to be socially isolated with just one or
two friends but not be lonely. As long as they are able to get enough
social interaction of the kind that works for them, they can be content.
So compared to the first group and looking at it from the medical
perspective, they are more 'disordered' but their quality of life is
less severely affected.

Greta Thunberg when she was talking about autism being a superpower was
referring to stereotypical autistic thinking which is logical,
systematic, and good at seeing patterns. People like this are good at
getting to the heart of the matter and some are good at making complex
ideas and systems appear simple. This ability can be an asset. For some
people, it is a passport to a job and a career because they how they
think gives them much sort after knowledge and skills.

However, this ability gets in the way of being able to do social
interaction. If your way of thinking is completely different to everyone
else, you will struggle with social interaction. Everyone assumes that
other people think like them despite all evidence to the contrary. This
is because the same parts of the brain are used to reflect about
yourself and about other people. It therefore requires significant
mental gymnastics to get round this and actually relate to the person
how they think.

In addition, if your way of thinking is significantly different to the
norm, this is likely to lead to different interests, which in turn
provides a barrier to social interaction. If your way of thinking
involves logic and patterns, you are more likely to be interested in how
things work than the latest cultural topic that people are talking
about.

Now lets consider routines. Autistic people stereotypically like routine
and hate change, and indeed this form an optional part of the diagnostic
criteria. Why might this be. Marc Beek suggests that routine is a
positive because autistic people think about things more and deliberate
before acting. Autistic people are more focused and careful in what they
do. Marc says he plans his walks down to the minutest detail so he knows
what he is going to say where. Although he had done these walks loads of
times, he still walks the route beforehand so that there are no
surprises. In his case, this is clearly a positive and not a disorder.
Under these circumstances, his autism is an asset, a useful difference
and not a disorder. However, Marc may be acting in this way because he
does not like change and therefore acts to reduces the chances of
unexpected changes while he is doing his walks. Perhaps it is a coping
strategy for an underlying 'disorder' that actually then makes him good
at what he does.

We know people for whom routine is a coping strategy to compensate for
processing issues. In their case, a change to their routine causes
confusion and thus anxiety because they do not know what to do. They
cannot process the change and work out how to deal with it. A routine
that does not require much thought is helpful. But it takes effort to
change the routine, to do something spontaneous. The routine feels safe
and secure in what appears to be a very chaotic world. A strong
preference for routines might not be a disorder in itself but the
underlying causes for this is a disorder in some cases.

Finally consider two brothers, Thomas and Jack Clements, as described in
the book "The autistic brothers" by Thomas Clements. This describes the
autism of these two brothers from the point of view of Thomas. Jack is
effectively non verbal, so nobody can really tell what he thinks about
the matter. Jack would be considered to be 'severely' autistic because
he does not speak, rocks and flaps, needs routine, cannot look after
himself in an meaningful way and will need care for the rest of his
life. Thomas is clearly intelligent and articulate. He has a gift for
learning languages, he is able to live independently and to work. He
would be considered to be high functioning. In his own words, compared
to his brother, he has mild autism.

Thomas is sufficiently impaired by his ability to socialise that he
clearly believes that autism, for him, is more a disorder than a
difference. However, in a way that flips everything around, Thomas is
prone to depression, Thomas is prone to depression, struggles with
sensory overload, gets social interaction wrong, and misunderstands
people. In contrast, Jack, is much happier in himself. He is happy being
himself amongst people who love him. Thomas describes him as innocent,
someone who has never coveted anything, envied anyone or spent time
worrying about things. Everyone is charmed by him. Jack is the one with
dress sense, the one who is 'cool'.

This makes you wonder which of the two brothers is actually the most
disordered. It makes you wonder what "disordered" actually means. Would
Jack consider himself disordered or just different? Thomas certainly
sees himself as 'disordered'.

Anyway, who wants to considered as 'disordered' when there is nothing
you can do about the mind. Not that long ago, people with physical
disabilities were seen as 'disordered' in the mind as in the body. In
the English language 'dumb' can mean either unable to speak or stupid --
a vestige that people who could not speak were considered to be stupid.
Perhaps more work needs to be done to ensure that autistic people also
are considered to be intelligent and not assumed to be stupid just
because they struggle with social interaction and/or the normal tasks of
everyday life.

To read more about Aspiedent's approach to disability and our work,
please visit
<https://aspiedent.org/index.php/autism-information/approach-disability>.

To chat to me about this further, please get in touch.

**Is Autism a disorder or a difference?**

Jen Blacow Operations Manager, Aspiedent CIC

If you have ever heard of Autistic Spectrum Disorder (or ASD), I think
you will have heard phrases such as 'autistic people are really good at
IT', 'autistic people are highly intelligent', and/or that 'people with
autism have special skills and abilities'. Another common one is that
'autistic people's brains are just wired differently'.

This can be really confusing though, as the word 'disorder', implies
that something is not functioning correctly. Something is not in
order... something is wrong!

**So is autism a disorder or a difference? Is it a superpower, or is it
a disability? **

Indeed, Greta Thunberg has stated that her autism is a 'superpower'. But
there are also parents of children with autism with severe issues and/or
extremely challenging symptoms. These parents are understandably
extremely concerned about autism being classified as some sort of
neurodevelopmental superiority.

To classify autism as a 'superpower' could trivialise the difficulties
some autistic people and families face, and implies that people with
autism are not in need of support. I mean really, why would somebody who
claims their autism is a superpower need to be in receipt of disability
benefits and support? It does not compute.

Most probably, the truth lies somewhere in the middle and varies from
individual to individual and from circumstance to circumstance.

Each person's autism is different, with a different combination of
underlying issues. Under some circumstances, autism can be a useful
difference, but in others, it is a very real disability -- a disorder if
you like.

I once asked Dr Elizabeth Guest, who is very clever and resourceful, but
who has severe sensory issues, poor social communication skills and many
difficulties navigating everyday life, whether her autism was a blessing
or a curse. She told me that it was a double-edged sword, and that kind
of makes sense.

The same autistic trait can be both a curse and a blessing depending on
the situation. Sometimes, a coping strategy to overcome a difficulty,
works to the autistic person's advantage in making them excel at what
they do. But it is a coping strategy for an underlying 'disorder'.

**Let us consider a few traits. **

There are autistic people, who like the majority of the population have
a strong desire to connect emotionally with people and to fit in.

For example, Tom. Tom is 'normal' in many ways. But he cannot master
social chit chat well enough to not inadvertently offend people and
alienate himself completely from peers. His peers find his attempts at
making friends off-putting.

Can you imagine the pure frustration and distress this causes him when
his autism prevents him from ever managing to make friends? Worse,
because he is classed as 'high functioning' (or 'mildly autistic'), he
is very much expected to be able to function, get a job and make friends
without help thank you very much.

But doing this is incredibly difficult for him. So Tom has become both
self-hating and bitter at the outside world. In this circumstance, the
social communication difficulties that come with autism are really quite
disabling for him.

On the other hand, there some are autistic people who have severe
difficulties in carrying out normal day to day activities and self-care
and mastering speech, for example, but who have a much-reduced desire to
connect emotionally and fit in. Such as Julie.

Julie does not have the ability to connect to other people emotionally,
and therefore just will not know what she is missing out on. Because her
behaviour is outwardly 'abnormal', she is classed as 'severely autistic'
and is entitled to day care.

She lives a relatively content life, because she is not interested in
participating in the social world and is quite happy among her stuffed
toys, favourite films, and fixed routines. Most people who meet her
think she is adorable, and she is a big hit amongst the care staff.

Looking at it from the medical perspective, Julie is more 'disordered'
compared to Tom. But her enjoyment of life is less severely affected.

It makes you wonder what "disordered" actually means. How does the term
'quality of life' fit into this? Would Julie consider herself disordered
and not having a good quality of life? Tom certainly sees himself as
'disordered' and I am sure would like a significant improvement in his
quality of life.

It can go the other way as well. For example, there are autistic people
who are highly intelligent thinkers, who are desperate to socially
interact and need people contact, but who cannot verbalise their
thoughts or control their bodies (their bodies appear to them to have a
mind of their own). They are labelled with severe learning disabilities.
Just imagine how painful that must be for them!

**Complicated, right? And we have not even scratched the surface. **

Greta Thunberg, when she was talking about autism being a 'superpower'
was referring to stereotypical autistic thinking which is logical,
systematic, and good at seeing patterns. People like this are good at
getting to the heart of the matter and some are good at making complex
ideas and systems appear simple. This ability can be an asset. For some
people, it is a passport to a job and a career because how they think
gives them much sought-after knowledge and skills.

However, this ability can really get in the way of being able to do
social interaction, as it does with my Director Elizabeth. Her way
thinking is completely different to everyone else, meaning she struggles
with even basic social interaction.

In addition, because her way thinking is significantly different to the
norm, this leads her to different interests, which in turn provides a
barrier to social interaction. Because her way of thinking involves
logic and patterns, she is more interested in how things work rather
than the latest cultural topic that people are talking about.

In conclusion, the answer to whether autism is a disorder, or a
difference is not clear. For some it is a severe disability and for
others it is of benefit in some areas of their life but a hindrance in
others. But whether it is considered a benefit or a misfortune, depends
on the autistic person's particular combination and interaction of
traits, their goals in life, their personality and their particular
definition of what a good quality of life is.

Aspiedent deliver expert autism training & consultancy and workplace
assessments for employers and employees (www.aspiedent.com), and help
autistic adults into employment (www.aspiedent.org).

For more information, please contact Jen Blacow at
<j.blacow\@aspiedent.com>.
