---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: What is the difference between Autism and Aspergers?
tag: autism
date: Sep 11, 2020, 12:52 PM
image: /social.jpg
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: What is the difference between autism and aspergers, is a common question. It can cause all sorts of confusion. This article aims to make the difference easy to understand, while also highlighting the complexities of the answer.
---
We often get asked what is the difference between autism and asperger
syndrome. Unfortunately this is not an easy question to answer,
especially when the two diagnosis have been combined into one: autism
spectrum disorder.

The reason for two separate diagnoses is mainly historical and concerns
two doctors, Leo Kanner in the US and Hans Asperger in Austria who
separately considered groups of children with unusual symptoms. Both
published their work in the 1940s during the second world war, although
the work of Hans Asperger was not translated into English until the
early 1990s.

Although sharing some characteristics comprising the 'triad of
impairments', there appeared to be key differences between the two
descriptions:

-   Those with Autism either did not speak at all, or did not use what
    language they did have to interact with people, whereas those with
    Asperger Syndrome spoke fluently.

-   Those with Autism appeared to have learning disabilities whereas
    those with Asperger Syndrome had normal or often above normal
    intelligence. Some with Asperger Syndrome have been described as
    "little professors".

-   Those with Autism had good fine motor control whereas those with
    autism were seen as being clumsy.

The triad of impairments that united these descriptions were
difficulties in social interaction, communication, and imagination.
Essentially these children did not interact with others in the normal
way, had difficulty making friends (or were just not interested), and
did not engage in imaginative (make believe) play.

As a consequence Autism was considered to be at the severe end of the
'autism spectrum' and Asperger Syndrome at the milder end. There was
actually another diagnosis: PDD-NOS or Pervasive Development Disorder
Not Otherwise Specified, which has also been combined with the current
diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder.

The problem that then occurred was that when clinicians were diagnosing
children, it was difficult to tell the two groups apart. This became
even harder as children turned into adults resulting in adults mainly
being diagnosed with Asperger Syndrome. A study published in 2012 showed
that which diagnosis was given depended more than anything else on the
particular clinic. Essentially, it was too difficult for clinicians to
distinguish between the different diagnoses reliably between clinics.

There was also the problem that given two young children, neither of
whom speak, it is virtually impossible to give an accurate prognosis.
Some children never learn to speak. Others do learn to speak, but many
years later than non autistic children and then appear to catch up --
and then match the description of Asperger Syndrome more than autism.

So the three diagnoses (Autism, Asperger Syndrome, PDD-NOS) were
combined into one: Autism Spectrum Disorder.

Now there is an uproar between 'neurodiversity' activists who used to
have 'Asperger Syndrome' but who can now claim the diagnosis of 'autism'
and parents of non verbal autistic children who are profoundly disabled
who feel sidelined and who are absolutely convinced that 'high
functioning autistic individuals' who have families, who can speak and
write articulately have nothing in common with their children.

There is even a lot of friction between 'high functioning autistic
individuals' who feel disabled by their autism. In general, these
individuals can live independently but they are often not able to handle
romantic relationships.

Just to add to the confusion, some non-verbal autistic children labelled
with severe learning disability in early childhood have learned to point
to a letter board and/or type and communicate in this way. Examples of
non-verbal autistic people who are clearly very intelligent and
sufficiently articulate to write books about their experiences are Tito
Mukhopadhyay, Ido Kedar, and Naoki Higashida.

The problem is that there is a lot of overlap in the underlying issues
between all three groups. Sensory issues, unusual perception, processing
issues, differences with focus and interest, and extreme ways of
thinking are found in each group. There is no easy way to draw lines
between them.

It does not help that over time there has been 'threshold creep' in the
diagnosis. This means that the differences between the general
population and those with the 'mildest' autism is gradually reducing.
This is easy to understand if you consider two children with similar
levels of difficulties who fall either side of what appears to be an
arbitrary threshold. In these circumstances, clinicians will have
compassion and include both children and over time the threshold moves.

At the moment there are a cacophony of voices all clamouring to be
heard, all wanting a slice of the funding.

What is needed is a different system of diagnosis. One that looks at the
actual underlying difficulties rather than just the symptoms. That is
what Aspiedent is trying to move towards, but we are just one small
voice amongst many -- and there are many vested interests.

If you have any questions or would like to get in touch, we would love
to hear from you. Call us on 07717 404846, e-mail us at
<info@aspiedent.com> or visit us at www.aspiedent.com

**Image credit:** Image
by [ElisaRiva](https://pixabay.com/users/ElisaRiva-1348268/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2062048) from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2062048)

**What is the difference between Autism and Aspergers?**

Simple question. Complicated answer, but please bear with me: our job is
to make it easy to understand.

The first thing to know is that 'Autism' and 'Aspergers' do not actually
exist anymore as separate diagnoses: it is now all Autism Spectrum
Disorder (ASD).

Actually, if it was up to **Aspiedent**, there would be a
completely different system of diagnosis: one that looks at the **actual
underlying difficulties** rather than just the **outward symptoms.**
This is what Aspiedent are trying to move towards, but we are just one
small voice amongst many -- and there are many vested interests.

**A bit of Necessary History**

So how did we get where we are now regarding '**Autism**' and
'**Aspergers**'?

The reason for two separate diagnoses is mainly historical and concerns
two Doctors, Dr Leo Kanner in the US, and Dr Hans Asperger in Austria,
who separately considered groups of children with unusual symptoms.

Both published their work in the 1940s during the second world war,
although the work of Hans Asperger was not translated into English until
the early 1990s.

Although sharing some characteristics comprising the 'triad of
impairments' associated with ASD (difficulties with social
communication, interaction and imagination), there appeared to be key
differences between the Doctor's descriptions of these children:

1.  Those with **Autism** either did not speak at all, or did not use
    what language they did have to interact with people, whereas those
    with **Asperger Syndrome** spoke fluently and did attempt to
    interact with people.

2.  Those with **Autism** appeared to have learning disabilities whereas
    those with Asperger Syndrome had normal or often above normal
    intelligence. Some with **Asperger Syndrome** have been described as
    "little professors".

3.  Those with **Asperger Syndrome** had good fine motor control whereas
    those with **Autism** were seen as being clumsy.

The triad of impairments united these descriptions. Essentially, all
these children did not interact with others in the normal way, had
difficulty making friends (or were just not interested), and did not
engage in make believe play.

Consequently, Autism was considered to be at the severe end of the
'autism spectrum' and Asperger Syndrome at the milder end (and in some
ways still is). There was actually another diagnosis: **PDD-NOS or
Pervasive Development Disorder Not Otherwise Specified**, which has also
been combined with the current diagnosis of Autism Spectrum Disorder.

**Moving into Present Day**

The problem then was that when clinicians were diagnosing children who
were not behaving or developing normally, it was difficult to tell the
two groups, ('Autistic' and 'Aspergers'), apart. It became even harder
as the children turned into adults, resulting in adults mainly being
diagnosed with Asperger Syndrome. PDD-NOS was diagnosed when children
did not quite fit into either category.

A study published in 2012 showed that which diagnosis was given,
depended more than anything else on the particular clinic.

**Essentially, it was too difficult for clinicians to distinguish
between the different diagnoses reliably between clinics! **

There was also the issue that given two young children, neither of whom
speak, it is virtually impossible to accurately predict how they would
turn out as adults. For example, some children never learn to speak.
Others do learn to speak, but many years later than non-autistic
children. Some of these then appear to catch up and match the
description of 'Asperger Syndrome', more than 'Autism'.

So the diagnoses Autism, Asperger Syndrome, and PDD-- NOS have been
combined into one: **Autism Spectrum Disorder.**

**Unhelpful Conflicts**

In relation to this, there is great unrest between 'Neurodiversity'
Activists who were diagnosed with 'Asperger Syndrome', but who can now
claim the diagnosis of autism', and parents of non-verbal autistic
children who are profoundly disabled.

These parents feel side-lined and are convinced that 'high functioning
autistic individuals', who for example have families and who can speak
and write articulately, have nothing in common with their autistic
children.

Just to add to the confusion, some non-verbal autistic children labelled
with severe autism and even learning disability in early childhood, have
learned to point to a letter board and/or type and communicate in this
way. Examples of non-verbal autistic people who are clearly highly
intelligent and sufficiently articulate to write books about their
experiences are Tito Mukhopadhyay, Ido Kedar, and Naoki Higashida.

In addition, there is even a lot of friction between some 'high
functioning autistic individuals' and Neurodiversity Activists. These
'high functioning individuals' can generally live independently, with
some support, but feel significantly disabled by their autism. It is
often these individuals who try to build bridges with parents of
autistic people, but who are often rebuffed by parents because of the
conflict with Neurodiversity Activists.

The problem is that there is a lot of overlap in the underlying issues
between all these groups. Sensory issues, unusual perception, processing
issues, differences with focus and interest, and extreme ways of
thinking are found in each group.

There is no easy way to draw lines between them! But we do need a better
way forward.

Finally, it does not help that over time there has been something called
'threshold creep' in the diagnostic system. This means that the
differences between the general population and those with the 'mildest'
autism is gradually reducing.

This is easy to understand if you consider two children with similar
levels of difficulties who fall either side of what appears to be an
arbitrary threshold. In these circumstances, Clinicians will have
compassion and include both children and so over time the threshold
moves.

At the moment there are a cacaphony of voices all clamouring to be
heard, and all wanting a slice of the limited funding.

Is there any wonder that Aspiedent feel it is important to start again
with the diagnoses of autism; holding off from making diagnoses so early
(as children develop and change), and identifying different groups based
on the underlying difficulties rather than the 'symptoms'?

However in order to do this, there needs to be adequate funding and
support for all children, regardless of any diagnosis, as they progress
through the stages of their development and education.

If you have any questions about this article or would like to get in
touch, we would love to hear from you. Call us on 07717 404846, e-mail
us at [info\@aspiedent.com](mailto:info@aspiedent.com) or
visit us at www.aspiedent.com
