---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Autism, COVID Restrictions and Employment
tag: movie
date: 2021-05-17
image: /social.jpg
author: Jen Blacow
authorImage: /jen.jpg
description: Which Treats of the Character and Pursuits of the Famous Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha
---
We have been under restrictions because of COVID19, for nearly 7 months
now and there is no sign that these restrictions will end, despite COVID
being downgraded from a high consequence disease back in March
(<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/high-consequence-infectious-diseases-hcid>.

This is having a serious impact on the employment situation. Many
businesses are closing or going bust, with the loss of very many jobs.
Many of the businesses that are managing to survive are making people
redundant. The unemployment rate now stands at 4.5% and is set to rise
further.

How is this impacting autistic adults in particular?

The full time employment rate for autistic adults of working age was
around 16%, so already very low. This proportion is likely to drop.

Autistic adults who do have jobs are being made redundant. Firms will
keep only the most productive and valuable employees who can be flexible
about their roles. We already know of autistic adults who would normally
be valuable employees who are being let go because they require more
supervision or more management time to implement reasonable adjustments.

It appears that even employment rules have changed and that the
employment tribunal is being more lenient with employers who make people
redundant. \[Jen, anything hard on this. I have a vague recollection
about this -- thought I saw something about this somewhere\]. In
addition, employment tribunals currently have a 40 000 case backlog and
hearings are now being scheduled for 2022. So it will take a very
determined employee to get through this.

There is uncertainty around what is going on, what further restriction
are going to be place on the population -- and thus which jobs are most
likely to be viable in the short term (probably tech, pharmaceuticals,
supermarkets, delivery drivers, logistics): but it is a problem if you
are qualified to do these or cannot do them because of disability. For
example, working in supermarkets stacking shelves, on the tills or just
as customer service representatives is not feasible for many autistic
people because of sensory issues.

Those who have been assigned to the various work programmes to get them
into work, now stand even less chance of getting work: any company
recruiting will now have a large group of well qualified and experienced
people to choose from. Those with autism will now have to shine out even
more from the crowd and really excel at their job. There may be
exceptions to this: tech companies looking for programmers will probably
still struggle because of the specialist nature of the work and the fact
that there is very steep learning curve to learn to program. \[check?\]

Those who have been made redundant are perhaps in a better situation
because they have work experience. But they will still have to shine out
well above their competition -- and be able to sell themselves. Selling
themselves is something most people struggle with, but autistic people
appear to struggle even more -- especially (as we have seen) at
interview.

But can this be an opportunity?

Some companies may see this as an opportunity to get rid of
underperforming or difficult employees, to become more efficient. They
may contract now, hope to weather the storm while consolidating and plan
to be in a good position to grow once (if?) the COVID restrictions are
over. Perhaps as part of this they could modify their recruiting
practices to recruit from a wider tool of talent in the future?

**Thumbnail image:** CovidEmployment

**Image credit:** Image
by [ar130405](https://pixabay.com/users/ar130405-423602/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2081168) from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2081168) Image
by [ar130405](https://pixabay.com/users/ar130405-423602/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2081168) from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2081168) 

**Thumbnail title:** Autism, Covid Restrictions and Employment

**Thumbnail description:** Autism and lockdown: Here we talk about the
impact that Covid-19 restrictions have and could have on autistic
people's employment situations.

**SEO (Meta) Title**: Autism and Covid Restrictions: Employment

**SEO (Meta) Description:** Autism and lockdown: Aspiedent discusses how
restrictions due to Covid have had an impact on autistic people's
employment and job prospects.

**Title:** Autism, Covid Restrictions and Employment

Autism, COVID Restrictions and Employment
=========================================

We have been under restrictions because of COVID-19, for nearly 7 months
now and there is no sign that these restrictions will end, despite COVID
being downgraded from a high consequence disease back in March
(<https://www.gov.uk/guidance/high-consequence-infectious-diseases-hcid>).

Many of us are aware that this is having a serious impact on the
employment situation. Many businesses are closing or going bust, with
the loss of swathes of jobs. Many of the businesses that are managing to
survive are making people redundant. The unemployment rate now stands at
4.5% and is set to rise further.

**How might this be impacting autistic adults in particular?**

The full-time employment rate for autistic adults of working age was
around 16%, so already very low. This proportion is likely to drop.

Some autistic people are thriving in their roles due to the social
pressure often associated with normal office working being lifted.
Social interaction can be very exhausting for people with autism and a
reduction in an expectation to do be around lots of people frequently
might be reducing their stress in general and enabling them to perform
better at work.

In fact, it has been found that some autistic children are performing
better with schoolwork and are less distressed as a result of school
closures, likely due to the reduced amount of time they spend around
other children and adults.

But like many people in general, autistic and neurodiverse adults who do
have jobs are being made redundant. Firms will keep only the most
immediately productive and valuable employees who can be flexible about
their roles. We already know of autistic adults who would normally be
valuable employees who are being let go because they currently (perhaps
temporarily) require more supervision or management time to implement
reasonable adjustments.

Employment rules have changed, and I have been told that the Employment
Tribunal is being more lenient with employers. It makes sense; the
Employment Tribunal may be more likely to find a normally unfair
dismissal reasonable in the current circumstances. Discrimination
against disabled employees may be more likely to be a 'proportionate
means of achieving a legitimate aim', which is part of the legal test
for whether an employer's conduct was in fact unlawful or necessary
discrimination.

In addition, Employment Tribunals clearly have their work cut out. They
currently have a 40,000 case backlog and hearings are now being
scheduled for 2022. So it will take an incredibly determined employee to
get through this. Not to mention the hybrid hearings being held with
some participants in person and some being on video links. This could
further stress autistic people out and put them off from seeking legal
redress to unfair treatment by their employer.

There is also uncertainty around what is going on, what further
restriction are going to be placed on the population -- and thus which
jobs are most likely to be viable in the short term (probably tech,
pharmaceuticals, supermarkets, delivery drivers, logistics). But this is
a problem if you are not qualified to do these jobs, or cannot do them
because of disability. For example, working in supermarkets stacking
shelves, on the tills or just as customer service representatives is not
feasible for many autistic people because of sensory issues.

Those who have been assigned to the various work programmes to get them
into work, now stand even less chance of getting work: any company
recruiting will now have a large group of well-qualified and experienced
people to choose from. Those with autism or other forms of
neurodiversity will now have to shine out even more from the crowd and
really excel at their job. There may be exceptions to this: tech
companies looking for programmers will probably still struggle because
of the specialist nature of the work and the fact that there is very
steep learning curve to learn to program.

Those who have been made redundant are perhaps in a better situation
because they have work experience. But they will also still have to
shine out well above their competition -- and be able to sell
themselves. Selling themselves is something most people struggle with,
but autistic people appear to struggle even more -- especially (as we
have seen) at interview.

On the plus side, unemployed autistic people may be less likely to
'stand out' negatively for being unemployed in the first place against
the droves of unemployed people who have lost their jobs as a result of
the pandemic.

But thinking longer term, can the events of the last few months be an
opportunity for progression?

**Can this be an opportunity?**

Some companies may see this as an opportunity to get rid of
underperforming or difficult employees, to become more efficient. They
may downsize now, hope to weather the storm while consolidating and plan
to be in a good position to grow once (if?) the COVID restrictions are
over.

Perhaps as part of this they could modify their recruiting practices to
recruit from a wider tool of talent in the future? Perhaps this forced
change to our workplaces and working habits might be the perfect
opportunity to uphaul the current traditional ways of recruiting and
working, in order to make way for talented people who would otherwise
lose out? People who have taken a untraditional approach to acquiring
skills -- or perhaps those who would excel at an apprenticeship.

It might not be the right time for companies who are in distress as a
result of the very difficult few months we have faced. But it might, for
some companies, be a good time to review policies and processes, look at
where the skills gaps are, and plan how to benefit from the potential
gains of employing people with autism and other forms of neurodiversity.

If you would like to have a chat about how embracing autism might be
able to benefit your business, get in touch with me at
<j.blacow@aspiedent.com> or on 07717 404846.

Aspiedent is a not for profit organisation helping businesses to
understand autism ([www.aspiedent.com](http://www.aspiedent.com)) and
helping autistic people achieve a more positive future
([www.aspiedent.org](http://www.aspiedent.org)).
