---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Employee not fitting in? Think Neurodiversity.
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile', 'management', 'difference']
date: 28 April 2021
image: DoesNotFitIn.jpg
thumbnail: DoesNotFitIn.jpg
metaTitle: Employee not fitting in? Neurodiversity at work
metaDescription: Examples of when neurodiversity might be an issue for employers and when reach out to Aspiedent when it seems an employee is not a good fit.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: We are often asked by networking contacts how they can best help Aspiedent help others. It can be as simple as listening out for complaints that an employee is not a good fit within a team, and suggesting the employer have an informal and confidential chat with us.
segments: [employers, diagnosis, careers]
creditURL: https://pixabay.com/users/geralt-9301/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=5582454
creditText: Image by Gerd Altmann
---
I am often asked by business networking contacts what they should keep
in mind when talking to others about Aspiedent. This is so that they can
identify a situation we can help with or a person we can help, and know
to make an introduction.

There are several sectors, for example, construction and finance, and
certain people, like HR Directors, HR Business Partners, or Diversity
and Inclusion Managers, that are great introductions. However, sometimes
it can be a simple comment that could open the door to more questions to
see if Aspiedent can help somebody.

One example of this is when somebody complains that a colleague gets on
their nerves, or struggles to fit in.

**Why think about Aspiedent when hearing complaints of somebody not fitting into a team?**

We define neurodiversity as 'thinking and perceiving the world in a
different way to what is considered to be the norm -- or which goes
beyond normal human variation'. Some, but not all employees with a form
of 'neurodiversity', can create a bit of unease amongst 'normal'
colleagues because of something (or a few things) about them which is
not quite 'right'. Colleagues may not be able to put their fingers on
what this is, or it may be because of specific behaviours of the person.

For example, a person might pull strange facial expressions in meetings.
Or they may not enjoy turning up to group events despite effort and
organisation being put into them by others (or even themselves). They
may have no interest in, or be downright avoidant of, socialising after
work, Christmas parties, or participating in company away days.

There may be no obvious reasons for this. Therefore, others assume they
are just a bit weird. Or they may be more willing to come to some kinds
of socialising than others. For example, a meal together may be ok, but
not going to the pub, or vice versa.

Neurodiverse employees might display more outlandish behaviours than
normal, such as having an extreme thirst for knowledge that annoys other
colleagues, a need to know every single detail of a plan or a decision
that has been made, or an over-the-top reaction to sudden changes of
plan. This can be disruptive and cause concern for other members of
staff.

**Culture 'blindness'?**

Cultures of organisations vary, and the corporate culture of some
neurodiverse employee's organisation may go completely over their head.
In fact, the person may be so different from everybody else in their way
of thinking and feeling (common in autism), that they find many
traditions bemusing, or just do not notice them at all!

They may seem to be actively going against company norms and breaking
social rules, such as not contributing to leaving presents for
individuals, or not walking on eggshells around the CEO when they visit
the office, or turn up unexpectedly at a company team meeting.

A lot of the social norms which we see in workplaces are not written
down anywhere, nor communicated openly at the induction stage of a new
hire. Most people pick these things up via observation and have an
instinctive drive to adapt, or to 'fit in'. Because of the differences
in thinking and perceiving the world, some people will not even get as
far as understanding that they are expected to do these things, let
alone understand why!

This can have a serious negative impact on their career progression and
other's ability to tolerate a neurodiverse colleague. Yet, this negative
impact may well be reversed if the company more clearly communicates
these expectations to all employees, especially those who may have
disclosed they are neurodiverse or suspect they are neurodiverse. For
example, the production of an 'informal staff handbook' may prove
invaluable for said employees.

Actually, being encouraged to produce such an 'informal staff handbook',
may force business leaders to rethink some of the potentially unhelpful
social norms within a company, such as an expectation to walk on
eggshells around a boss! It could also help *all* employees be clear on
what is and is not expected of them. We are all diverse.

**Apparent Ignorance**

What comes up sometimes in the workplace is the issue of apparent lack
of respect on behalf of an employee. This is usually a result of the
person's inability to not be blunt (they say it as it is) and difficulty
with 'fluffing the truth'.

This is often amplified when the person has an inherent disinterest or
lack of ability to stroke anybody's ego; another workplace practice that
does not get written in formal staff handbooks!

We have come across employers who think that an employee is just not
listening, because they constantly ask questions about a project that
the manager thought was covered in detail in the project meeting.

However, this can often actually mean that the employee is struggling to
take in information aurally (which was how project briefs are often
mainly communicated) and just needed it writing down for them, perhaps
with a few diagrams.

**The point**

The above examples are a few of many things I hear of time and time
again regarding 'difficult' employees. Often the person who has thought
to talk to me about a colleague or employee's behaviour has some
awareness of neurodiversity or autism and an inkling that the person may
have some form of neurodiversity.

However, I do not like to think how many other people are dealing with
'difficult or 'non-team playing' staff, without knowing that the issue
could be easily fixable through more understanding of neurodiversity.

Not just because a person might be losing a job as a result of their
disability, but also because an employer may be experiencing preventable
stress dealing with this person, or losing an otherwise valuable
employee through lack of knowledge and understanding.

If you experience any of the above such as a team member struggling to
fit in, or hear others describing similar issues with a member of staff
they are dealing with, reach out to me. It may not be an issue that can
be explained by neurodiversity and therefore fixed by Aspiedent, but
there is no harm in simply considering whether it could be.
