---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: The impact of an autism profile
tag: movie
date: 2021-05-17
image: /social.jpg
author: Jen Blacow
authorImage: /jen.jpg
description: Which Treats of the Character and Pursuits of the Famous Gentleman Don Quixote of La Mancha
---
**The impact of an autism profile**

An autism profile forms an important part of Aspiedent's Workplace
assessment. It is the part that underpins the 'reasonable adjustment' we
recommend. An autism profile is extremely important to help an employer
to understand *why* the reasonable adjustments are necessary and how
they will help.

It is very difficult to maintain a reasonable adjustment if you don't
understand the reasoning behind it. In fact, these kinds of reasonable
adjustments often end up on paper but not implemented.

But imagine what would happen if you actually understood precisely why
the reasonable adjustment is needed and how it will help? Surely under
these circumstances a good manager and a good employer, would be
equipped to make appropriate reasonable adjustments as an when necessary
-- even when the working environment changes.

With an in depth understanding of someone's autism, it is easier to
pre-empt difficulties before they arise, and if difficulties do arise,
deal with them before they cause disruption.

If/when the person get a promotion, the autism profile can be passed on
and a new manager should be able to work with it and in consultation
with the employee adapt recommendations to fit the new role.

We often say that we go in and fix the problem. Perhaps our problem is
that we fix the problem so effectively that we very rarely have to go
back. Once we have fixed the problem and the manager and the employee
understand what is really going on, there is no further need for our
input: they can adapt as appropriate.

Autism profiles do not have to be done as part of a workplace
assessment. They can be done as a standalone assessment and can be very
useful when someone is wondering where their career should go next,
especially when they have made bad choices in the past. Via an autism
profile we can help them understand why the choices were bad, why it
went wrong, and steer them towards careers that they are likely to excel
in.

Whether done as a stand-alone assessment or as part of a workplace
assessment an autism profile can have a profound effect on an individual

1)  It helps them understand themselves. It puts the past in context and
    gives hope for the future.

2)  It helps them understand how they are different from everyone else.
    This leads to acceptance of other people and often a better
    understanding of the rest of the world.

3)  It helps them understand their strengths and weaknesses. Why they
    struggle in some areas but excel in other areas. An autism profile
    can highlight the coping strategies that they are already using.
    Sometimes these coping strategies can be harnessed for a satisfying
    career.

4)  We find that an autism profile improves mental health by reducing
    anxiety and depression. We never ceased to be amazed at how simply
    helping people understand what is really going helps their mental
    health!

5)  It can provide a pathway for the autistic individual to gain new
    skills before attempting to (re-)enter the jobs market.

In short an Aspiedent autism can profile can be life-changing for an
autistic individual who has struggled throughout their adult life. If an
autism profile is given while the person is still young, it will prevent
the suffering and heartache experienced by many autistic adults due to a
lack of understand of what is really going on both on their part and the
world around them. Surely preventing mental health difficulties is
better than curing them later on?

\[I think it would help to have some examples woven into this -- add the
emotional interest\].

**The impact of an autism profile**

An Autism Profile is a full description of how autism affects a
particular a particular individual. Aspiedent's Autism Profiles explain
what *underlying autistic issues* somebody has that are responsible for
their external autistic symptoms, problems and even talents.

We have witnessed it being literally life-changing for an autistic
person when they receive their own autism profile. And Aspiedent only
have to ask a person relatively informal questions to formulate one.

**How? Here are 5 advantageous impacts of an Autism profile:**

1)  **It helps them understand themselves. It puts the past into context
    and gives hope for the future.**

The autistic individual might have had many failed friendships or
relationships, and therefore concluded that they are a gullible or
unlikeable person, destined to be alone. But from their autism profile,
they now see that they have been drawn to certain people due to their
difficulties with processing emotions (common in autism), and their
experiences now make sense to them. They can also now see how they might
go about building more successful, healthy relationships in future.

2)  **It helps them understand how they are different from everyone
    else. This leads to acceptance of other people and often a better
    understanding of the rest of the world.**

Some autistic people miss out on the richness of the social world
because other people do not make sense to them. This can upset or annoy
the autistic person. An Autism Profile can help the person understand
how other people perceive the world differently to them, which can help
them to tolerate and accept non-autistic people (the same thing we ask
non-autistic people to do for autistic people). When this works both
ways, it is much more effective.

3)  **It helps them understand their strengths and weaknesses. Why they
    struggle in some areas but excel in other areas. An autism profile
    can highlight the coping strategies that they are already using.
    Sometimes these coping strategies can be harnessed for a satisfying
    career.**

Autistic strengths and weaknesses can be more extreme than average. So
it is vital that these strengths and weaknesses are understood. Once
properly understood, these extreme strengths and weaknesses can be built
on or worked around.

Sometimes an autistic individual has made poor study choices or
regretful career choices because of the complexity of their underlying
issues. An autism profile helps them to understand what went wrong and
why and therefore create a plan for future fulfilment.

4)  **We find that an autism profile improves mental health by reducing
    anxiety and depression. We never ceased to be amazed at how simply
    helping people understand what is really going helps their mental
    health!**

A lot of depression and anxiety in autistic people is often down to not
understanding themselves or the world around them. When their specific
underlying issues and subsequent autistic traits are clearly explained
to them, they can suddenly feel calmer and more able to problem solve
around challenging situations.

5)  **It can provide a pathway for the autistic individual to gain new
    skills before attempting to (re-)enter the jobs market.**

Last but not least, choosing the correct career path that matches a
person's natural ability profile, and preferred sensory environment, can
prevent a person from wasting twenty years of their working life doing
the wrong jobs and feeling miserable. Autistic people generally have
more uneven ability profiles due to autism and it is therefore important
they have quality help figuring out what job will be right for them.
This really saves them a lot of grief.

In an employment context, an Autism Profile forms part of Aspiedent's
Autism Workplace Assessments. Whether done as a standalone assessment or
as part of a Workplace Assessment, an Autism Profile can have a profound
effect on an individual.

**How do Autism Profiles apply to employment?**

Employers have a legal duty to make 'Reasonable Adjustments' for
employees with autism. An Autism Profile forms an important part of
Aspiedent's Workplace Assessment and underpins the 'reasonable
adjustments' that we recommend.

An autism profile is extremely important to help an employer to
understand *why* the recommended reasonable adjustments are necessary
and how they will help!

Understanding why a colleague needs, for example, their own set quiet
desk in a hot-desking area, means other employees are more likely not to
resent the fact that they do not have their own set desk too.

It is much easier for other employees to empathise and make
accommodations for an autistic colleague, if they know that this
colleague needs their own desk because they find office background
office noise physically painful (rather than having their own desk just
makes them 'feel better'!)

Moreover, it is difficult to maintain a reasonable adjustment if you
don't understand the reasoning behind it. In fact, these kinds of
reasonable adjustments often end up on paper but not implemented (or in
the bin).

If understood *precisely why* the reasonable adjustment is needed and
how it will help, then a good employer or manager would be equipped to
make appropriate reasonable adjustments even when the working
environment changes (so you don't have to repeatedly get advice).

With an in depth understanding of someone's individual autism, it is
easier to pre-empt difficulties before they arise, and if difficulties
do arise, it is easier to deal with them before they cause any
disruption.

If/when the employee in question gets a promotion, their autism profile
can be passed on and a new manager should be able to work with it. In
consultation with the employee, they could easily adapt recommendations
to fit the new role.

**Being Proactive rather than Reactive**

We often say that we go into workplaces with a need related to autism
and fix the problems. Perhaps our issue is that we fix the problems so
effectively that we very rarely have to go back. Once we have fixed the
problems and the manager and the employee understand what is really
going on, there is no further need for our input: they can adapt as
appropriate.

That being said, Autism Profiles do not have to be done as part of a
Workplace Assessment. They can be done as a standalone assessment and
can be very useful when someone is wondering where their career should
go next, especially when they have made regrettable choices in the past.
Via an Autism Profile, we can help them understand why the choices were
not great, why it went wrong, and steer them towards careers that they
are likely to excel in.

In short, an Aspiedent Autism Profile can be life-changing for an
autistic individual who has struggled throughout their adult life. If an
Autism Profile is given while the person is still young, it will prevent
the suffering and heartache experienced by many autistic adults due to a
lack of understand of what is really going on both on their part and the
world around them. We believe that preventing mental health difficulties
is better for everybody concerned rather than curing them later on

For more information about Aspiedent's Autism
Profiles, please visit [Autism Profiler](link to autism profiler), contact us on
<info@aspiedent.com> or call Jen on 07717 404846.
