---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Can we get some more humility in the (class)room please?
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile', 'ways of thinking']
date: 20th May 2021
image: LeaningDiversity.jpg
thumbnail: LeaningDiversity.jpg
metaTitle: Are company diversity and inclusion initiatives missing humility?
metaDescription: Jen Blacow from Aspiedent muses over whether humility is an undervalued skill that might be key to company diversity and inclusion initiatives.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: Is humility (including open-mindedness) an undervalued quality or skill that might be key to the success of company diversity and inclusion initiatives? Can you teach and learn Diversity?
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
creditURL: https://pixabay.com/users/johnhain-352999/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=683946
creditText: Image by John Hain
---
## Learning diversity

I work with people with autism. I have been told several times that I
must have the patience of a saint or that I am 'too modest'.

Usually, this comes about when the person who says this observes me
dealing with some of the trickier aspects of my job. For example,
dealing with misunderstandings between my Autistic boss (Elizabeth), and
somebody else.

These misunderstandings are sometimes caused by a big difference in the
way Elizabeth thinks and the way the other person thinks, it is
certainly rarely wilful conflict on anybody's part.

What I think, is my ability to be humble, my 'humility', which is
includes open-mindedness (being able to take on other's points of view),
is a great asset when working with people who are wildly different from
me.

If I did not have humility or open-mindedness, I might jump straight to
the position of 'they\'re wrong, I\'m right' when disagreeing with what
somebody has said. Instead, I stop and think, fully acknowledge that I
might be in the wrong, and try and see it from the other\'s point of
view before deciding if I was wrong or right.

When I say humility, I do not mean cowardice. Humility is not a sign of
weakness; it is really a strength. I think we get this mixed up a lot --
somebody who is 'too proud' to admit mistakes, for example, is actually
trying to protect themselves and their sense of self-worth.

The ability to be humble and able take on other's points of view are
vital skills when working with people who are very different from us.
So, the 'too modest' attitude, which is just pride reversed (humility),
is potentially foundational to real diversity. I must add that people
who make these comments about me being a saint may not know what my
colleagues have to put up with working closely with me!

This leads to the issue in question. Why does real diversity within
companies seem so difficult to achieve? And can we teach and learn
diversity? If so, where do we start? Below I try to answer these three
questions, but I would appreciate your (the readers\') thoughts on this.

**Why does real diversity within companies seem so difficult to achieve?**

The challenge to diversity in business, is that people gravitate to
those who are like them. Even autistic people. It is biological.

There is a neurological explanation for this: the part of the brain you
use to think and reason about yourself is also used to think and reason
about others. This leads people (including me) to automatically assume
that others think like me despite all evidence to the contrary.

By surrounding yourself with people who think about and experience the
world in a similar way to you, this assumption becomes true!

I often hear about people wanting to mix with other 'like-minded\'
people, and we tend to make friends with people who have similar
interests and views to ourselves.

The problem with trying not to mix with people who are similar to us, is
that it takes much more brain effort to engage effectively and build
relationships with people who do not think like we do.

Some people are naturally more inclined to be far more accepting of
difference than others.

For example, there are a few people who are fascinated by how different
people tick and who are more likely to include others who do not think
about or perceive the world in the same way. For example, I always seem
to make good friends with people from vastly different cultures.

But in general, it seems truly 'doing diversity' is genuinely difficult.

We do not know whether growing up with a wider variety of people helps
or if you find it easier if you have lived and worked in another country
and thus had to accommodate different ways of doing things.

Do you find it easy to interact and engage with people strikingly
different from you? And if so, why do you think it works?

Although Elizabeth and I like to work with people who think differently,
I have even noticed this phenomenon between us and the autistic people
we support into employment.

One of the autistic women we work with thinks in similar (albeit more
extreme) ways that I do. This makes it quite easy for me to empathise
with her as I view the world through similar lenses as her.

However, I am not as good at interacting with another woman that we
support; her style of thinking and feeling is much more closely related
to those of Elizabeth. Hence, they communicate and get on very well. I
like everybody we work with equally; it is just that it is less tiring
for me to interact with the first woman than the second.

In an employment environment, this links to how people 'come across' to
one another.

Few autistic people manage to master the skills needed to succeed at an
interview. They may display mannerisms that others find off-putting as
they are not the same as the interviewers' or the interviewers' existing
employees.

For example, some autistic people speak in a monotone, seem \'wooden\',
do not make eye contact, or speak with a strange inflection. It marks
people as 'not like them'.

**Can we teach and learn diversity?**

So why is it that people are able to understand and accept that
buildings need to be wheelchair friendly, even if they are not
wheelchair users themselves, but when it comes to somebody's difference
in thinking or differences in learning, it is much harder for us to get
our head around?

Of course, it does not help that neurological differences such as autism
tend to be 'hidden'.

Businesses stand to gain from diverse staff teams. For example, a team
of three including a strong manager but poor writer, an excellent writer
but a poor manager and who needs a bit of help with managing their day
to day tasks , and somebody who is extremely good at getting things done
but needs a bit of help with writing, could be incredible. So why not
aim to be more diverse?

It works for us at Aspiedent CIC, as mentioned above. Elizabeth needs to
work with people who can handle the areas that she is not able to and
thus enabling her to do what she is good at (and vice versa).

But this requires diversity along with learned tolerance and
appreciation of each other.

**Where do we start?**

This article is trying to acknowledge that helping people get to a place
where they can appreciate diversity is not easy.

We need to recognise that this does not come naturally to many people
and devise strategies to support people to *learn* to appreciate
diversity.

But how can people learn to accept, appreciate and value difference?

I go back to my original point in this article that is by trying to have
more humility and being less proud and sure that what you see/think/feel
is what other people do too, you will create a space for yourself to
appreciate real diversity.

Being humble is not a bad trait when it comes to working in teams and
with other people. It includes open-mindedness and actually shows
strength of character. I think it provides a foundation of tolerance for
differences, which could then develop into incredibly effective working
relationships. Leave the 'like-minded' people to your social network.

If I am wrong in my above assumptions, maybe we should do some research
as to why some people are naturally better at accepting people who are
different, before we come up with ways to teach people how to do it.

Is diversity even skill-based and can we even teach it?

The jury is out on this, but what is clear is that any education should
be in conjunction with working with and building relationships with a
variety of diverse people. The practical aspect is vital. This is not
something you can learn in a classroom!

Does anyone else have any ideas?