---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: LinkedIn Disaster
tag: movie
date: Jun 3, 2020, 2:37 PM
image: /social.jpg
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: I tried to teach my autistic boss how to use LinkedIn - it was disaster. A blog highlighting how some autistic people struggle with emotional connection via electronic media. 
---
**I tried to teach my autistic boss how to use LinkedIn: it was disaster.**

Jen Blacow Operations Manager, Aspiedent CIC

My autistic boss, Dr Elizabeth Guest, is great. I often advertise the
fact that she is a genius in many ways and the best boss I have ever
had. She has always trusted me to get on with my work and has always
kept me in mind when thinking about the direction of our organisation,
Aspiedent.

She encourages my professional development, allows me to make mistakes
and listens to me. Furthermore, it is clear to me she cares and wants
the best for her employees (even if that is not the best thing for her).

She can solve problems nobody else can solve. She is brilliant at
understanding and explaining complexity. However, when I tried to teach
her how to use LinkedIn: it was a disaster.

Elizabeth has had a LinkedIn page for years, but never done much with
it. First of all I spent some time helping her to update her page. She
complained that her LinkedIn feed was rubbish. It was just like Facebook
which she hates. 

So I explained that LinkedIn shows you stuff based on what you have
liked and commented on. To her credit, she had a go, but made a real
mess of it.

She liked some posts, which was good. But within a couple of days, she
had got herself in a complete muddle. She had already potentially upset
somebody, and had also received LinkedIn messages from connections which
she had no idea what to do with.

'*LinkedIn HELP'* was literally the subject line of her emails to me
about this!

It appeared she had tried to provide some useful input in a comment on a
blog post. Unfortunately, her autistic brain could not see how this may
have come across as unwelcome criticism and was not exactly what the
poster might have liked in response to their blog post.

I came to the rescue and tried to do what I class as 'damage limitation'
by taking over the interaction. Fortunately, the connection was very
graceful about this and we are now back on the right foot.

The problem is that I cannot get Elizabeth to understand that LinkedIn
is not about critiquing posts, nor about imparting information, but
purely about building relationship. And you do not build relationship by
criticising people.

This makes no sense to my autistic boss at all. \"*But don\'t people
want to improve their understanding?\"* she cries. No we do not. Well,
not here on LinkedIn, in public. Instead we want \"social oil lies\" and
to be \"verbally stroked\".

Social oil lies are her way of explaining what is to her baffling and
boring social chit chat. From her point of view, it is all about
flattering people by saying things that are not strictly true (social
oil lies) and about stroking them with what is to her meaningless
conversation (verbal stroking).

My autistic boss has noticed that during social chit chat (including
over social media), people share emotions and social chit chat is not so
much about imparting information as about making emotional connections. 

Unfortunately, Elizabeth has no idea how to make that emotional
connection. She struggles with emotions generally and struggles to
process emotions that are being gently lobbed in her direction in real
time. It normally takes her a few days to process what was going on. 

As a consequence she comes across as cold and uninterested, although
this is far from the truth. I believe this is one of her greatest
autistic challenges.

The idea of making emotional connection via electronic media such as
LinkedIn, Twitter and other social media is too much for her. Computers
do not do emotions and emoji\'s do not make sense - she has no idea what
emotion most of them are supposed to convey, much less any idea as to
how to use them. It is all much too vague and nebulous.

My boss likes information. Her idea of building relationship is to have
an intellectual exchange of ideas. That is fun to her - though good luck
keeping up with her. I learn something new every time I see her, which
is several times a week. 

Actually, we ended up turning this situation into a positive in that we
better understand why Elizabeth should not be let loose on social media,
and I also made a good connection with the blog poster. Furthermore, we
have produced this post in a bid to help people understand and hopefully
accommodate if Elizabeth misses the mark in future!

It is safe to say though that I will be doing my best to look after
Elizabeth\'s LinkedIn page from now on. She is now under strict
instructions to simply like things and make nice comments - and to just
ignore anything she thinks is rubbish!

In the meantime, she will continue to use her skills of analysing and
explaining complexity and continue to work out autism behind the scenes
and explain autism.

Note that not all autistic people have difficulty making emotional
connections with people. They have different problems with social
interaction.

To find out about our work, visit us at
[www.aspiedent.com](http://www.aspiedent.com) and
[www.aspiedent.org](http://www.aspiedent.org)
