---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Are you missing a trick in your struggle to obtain valuable employees?
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: Jul 9, 2020, 12:59 PM
image: /assets/blog/Adjustments.jpg
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/Adjustments.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: Are you missing a trick in your search for valuable employees? With the right understanding in place, employing people with autism could be a brilliant move for your small business.
segments: [diagnosis, careers, education, employers]
---
**Autism and Small Businesses -- notes**

The first consideration is that you need someone who can do the job to a
high standard. Small businesses are not charities and cannot afford to
take on someone who will not pull their weight.

The good news is that autistic people can make excellent employees.

Have you had a problem that you train someone up to do your job and they
are poached by a bigger company who can afford to pay more?

Well we are not saying this won't happen to an autistic employee, but we
can say it is less likely. It can be very difficult for an autistic
person to get a job because of how they present socially and because of
poor interview skills. Therefore if they are happy in their job and you
do not take advantage of them, they are likely to be loyal. Most
autistic people prefer the known to the unknown. Afterall life is
stressful enough for them, so why make working life more stressful too.

We had a very good employee. He was punctual, happy to stay on after his
normal going home time occasionally when we had a deadline to meet. He
loved to help us out at events and had an eye for noticing when someone
wanted to talk to us. Ok we had to train him to take lunch breaks and
actively encourage him to take holiday. But that was a small price to
pay for his willingness to get on with the job.

When he started with us, his social skills were very poor. By the time
he left (because we no longer had a job for him), he was cracking jokes.
He has now moved on into a new job and doing well.

We know of someone who is the top sales person in their company. But the
company is not managing the person's sensory issues well and appears to
be trying to manage her out. If anyone is looking for a good sales
person (currently works in IT), please let us know.

The key problem autistic people have in finding a job is poor interview
skills. But are you recruiting someone who can do the job or someone who
is good at interviews. Just think about that for a bit. What are you
actually recruiting for? What skills do you need?

Would it make sense to ensure that the person can do the job and that
they can fit in with the rest of the team? How can you ensure that with
an interview.

It will take work (and you may need some help), but why not create a set
of tasks for people to do to demonstrate they have the skills to do the
job. If teamworking is a key requirement, then get candidates to work in
teams -- but on a realistic task and make sure the team they will be
working with are involved.

There are methodologies to help you devise tasks that test for a set of
competencies. Become familiar with these and use them.

Once in the job, you need to sure they know what is expected of them.
You might be surprised at what they do simply out of ignorance. If this
happens simply tell them that what they have done is not acceptable and
reiterate what is acceptable. This kind of thing is key.

If you are tolerant and understand what are likely to be the key
difficulties, employing an autistic person can be very rewarding -- and
add value to your business.

If creatively is what you are looking for, then certainly consider an
autistic person. We once did a creative thinking exercise with a group
of 8 autisitic people which had been done with a group of 80
entrepreneurs. The autistic group won hands down, despite only half of
them contributing.

Autistic people who are not creative won't apply: they won't be
interested.

Virtually all jobs say they want good communication skills. If that is
on your job advert, why is it there and what exactly do you want? Do you
mean good social skills, or simply to be able to understand what you
have asked them to do and/or the ability to explain what they have done?

Would you prefer someone who just turns up (on time) and gets on with
the job without feeling the need to socialise? Believe me, this can
work. It depends on the job.

Would it be ok to have someone who takes in the information, ideas from
different people and then comes up with an innovative idea some days
later once they have had time to process it all and think about it?

During our work with employers we come across autistic people who

-   recognising fraud

-   Are brilliant at understanding a large and complex database

-   Are brilliant at taking a large body of written information and
    analysing it

-   Are brilliant at sales

-   Are brilliant at both design of a system and at creating an
    intuitive user interface (this combination is extremely rare).

-   Are brilliant at recognising when a parked car has moved to a
    different place

-   Can tell what is wrong with an engine by listening to it

-   Who are whizzes at learning new software in an area familiar to
    them.

Unfortunately it is extremely difficult to ascertain these skills at
interview and often they only come to light when the person is carrying
out their duties.

Note that not all autistic people will excel at some skill.

**Are you missing a trick in your struggle to obtain valuable employees?
Part 1**

Jen Blacow Operations Manager, Aspiedent CIC

I sometimes wonder if small businesses feel that they don't have the
resources to manage autistic employees, or worry that they would not be
able to cope employing and managing an autistic person because of lack
of understanding and fear of getting it wrong.

Perhaps the concern is that it would cause so many problems it would
overwhelm the employee's value to the business? Perhaps sometimes, it
does. But we know of cases where it hasn't, and the employee has been a
major asset.

There are potentially great benefits to employing people with
neurodiversity, for example autism.

Of course, the first consideration is that you need someone who can do
the job to a high standard. Small businesses are not charities and
cannot afford to take on someone who will not pull their weight or whose
difficulties are so disabling that they cannot do the particular job
they are employed to do effectively.

**But the good news is that autistic people can make excellent small
business employees.**

I have heard many smaller companies in the IT sector say that they spend
time and resources training someone up, only for them to be poached by a
bigger company for a larger salary!

We are not saying this will not happen to an autistic employee, but we
can say it is less likely.

It can be very difficult for an autistic person to get a job because of
how they present socially and because of poor interview skills.

Therefore if they are happy in their job and you do not take advantage
of them, they are likely to be loyal. Most autistic people prefer the
known to the unknown. After all life is stressful enough for them, so
why make working life more stressful too?

Once in the job, you may need to make that sure they know what is
expected of them. You might be surprised at what they do simply out of
ignorance and/or difficulty with social skills. For example,
interrupting conversations without an invite, or sending uninvited
(critical -- but constructive criticism to them) feedback to the boss!

If something like this happens which is not part of your company
culture, simply tell them that what they have done is not acceptable and
reiterate what is acceptable. If they have genuine concerns tell them
how to raise them and who to raise them with. This kind of thing is
simple but key.

If creativity is what you are looking for in an employee, then certainly
consider an autistic person. We once did a creative thinking exercise
with a group of 8 autistic people which had been done with a group of 80
entrepreneurs. The autistic group won hands down, despite only half of
them contributing.

Autistic people who are not creative will not apply for creative jobs:
they won't be interested.

**Basically, if you are tolerant and understand what are likely to be
the key difficulties, employing an autistic person can be extremely
rewarding -- and add value to your business.**

We once had a brilliant autistic employee.

Ok, so he didn't communicate with us much unless we asked him a direct
question in 'just the right way', or when he was warning us about some
kind of imminent danger (like the time I left my backpack in front of my
car and was about to set off and drive over it!)

But he was helpful and hardworking and his accuracy and attention to
detail was quite brilliant.

Yes, we had to train him to take lunch breaks and actively encourage him
to take holiday. But that was a small price to pay for his willingness
to get on with the job.

He was punctual, focused, and happy to stay on after his normal going
home time when we had a deadline to meet. He loved to help us out at
events and had an eye for noticing when an exhibition stand visitor
wanted to talk to us, and we were not paying attention to them.

When he started with us, his social skills were very poor. But by the
time he left (because we no longer had a job for him), he was cracking
jokes. He has now moved on into a new job and is doing well.

If you would like to know how to tap into the talents of autistic people
whilst ensuring you are fulfilling your duties as a good manager or
employer, please contact us.

Aspiedent deliver expert autism training & consultancy and workplace
assessments for employers and employees (www.aspiedent.com), and help
autistic adults into employment (www.aspiedent.org).

For more information, please contact Jen Blacow at
<j.blacow@aspiedent.com>.

[STOP HERE REST NEXT WEEK](link to the next part)