---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Moving Forward despite disabilities and difficulties
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: Jul 9, 2021, 6:12 PM
image: /assets/blog/MovingForwardAutismEmployment.jpg
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/MovingForwardAutismEmployment.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: Aspiedent expects the autistic adults we support into employment to do things they find uncomfortable. This post touches on how and why this is important and gives examples. For anybody to meet their potential, they must be prepared to be challenged, endure difficult experiences and accept the things they can’t change. How to support mental health at work is a hot topic at the moment. We argue that challenging people can be good for their mental health in the long term.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
---
**Thumbnail image:** MovingForwardAutismEmployment

**Image credit**: Image by [mohamed
Hassan](https://pixabay.com/users/mohamed_hassan-5229782/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2488210) from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=2488210)

**Thumbnail title:** Moving forward despite disabilities and
difficulties

**Thumbnail description:** Aspiedent expects the autistic adults we
support into employment to do things they find uncomfortable. This post
touches on how and why this is important and gives examples. For anybody
to meet their potential, they must be prepared to be challenged, endure
difficult experiences and accept the things they can't change. How to
support mental health at work is a hot topic at the moment. We argue
that challenging people can be good for their mental health in the long
term.

**SEO (Meta) Title:** How to treat autistic adults? Well, treat them
like adults!

**SEO (Meta) Description:** Aspiedent explains why it is important
adults with disabilities to challenge themselves, whilst also accepting
things they cannot change.

**Title:** Moving Forward despite disabilities and difficulties

**Try not to let fear hold you back **

Aspiedent helps autistic people develop their skills and move forward in
life. Helping autistic people move forwards might sound like an easy
thing, but it is not.

It requires us to expect autistic and neurodiverse people to put effort
into things, such as their learning & development. It also involves
acceptance of things they cannot change. For example, the world & their
specific difficulties. We expect them to hold themselves accountable.

Sometimes, I want to help by doing things for the individual or by being
hesitant to ask them to put themselves in situations that I know they
will find difficult. But for anybody to reach their potential, they must
be prepared to put themselves in situations that they find
uncomfortable. Many autistic people struggle with uncertainty, but that
is part of life and to move forward you have to learn to cope with
situations that are rife with uncertainty.

We might be considered harsh because of this, but we expect development
from the autistic people we help. Challenging them is what we have found
is the best way to achieve it. It is difficult for anybody to move
forward without being challenged. Unfortunately, challenging people is
frowned upon by some in today's world as it is seen as detrimental to an
individual's mental health. We would argue that it is more detrimental
to mental health in the longer term if we do not allow people to endure
hard times.

I know it is not easy. I had to make a difficult decision recently that
involved me stepping up to the plate at work and moving forward. My
first thoughts were: I am not good enough to do this; I am not
responsible enough, I make too many mistakes, I am not a finished
article. Will I ever be? I don't know. I am frightened.

I am confident many of you reading this can relate to this.

It continued: I can't deal with this. I am going to mess it up, I am an
impostor. The words got harsher & harsher and more & more damning until
before I knew it, I was a bit of a wreck!

But then I looked up and a voice said to me: If you spend all your time
worrying about whether you are good enough for this, you are going to
limit yourself helping anyone. Do not hold yourself back. Do not let the
dark thoughts hold you to ransom. Now go forth and do it. Suddenly I
felt better.

That said, there are some things you have to accept you or others cannot
do or will never be able to do well. As well as forcing yourself to
endure difficult situations to progress (which we expect the people we
help into employment to do), we also have to accept limitations and
accept that some goals are just not feasible.

The above stands despite the unhelpful myth that you can '*be whoever or
whatever you want to be'* or '*you can achieve anything if you just put
your mind to it'*.

Some people with neurodiverse issues who struggle with certain things
like social interaction, or learning new subjects, get told they lack
confidence, which is not the case. They have fundamental issues which
make social interaction or learning new things hard because the normal
way of presenting material does not match the way that they learn.

For example, we recently did an autism profile for somebody who has
major difficulties processing written information due to her underlying
issues. She also has a conflict between her thinking style (heavily
visual) and the type of activities she loves and is good at (working
with and helping people).

This conflict meant that her attempts at gaining qualifications in the
humanities or social care have failed despite her being highly
intelligent. Her failures are because her way of taking in information
is incompatible with study expectations in the areas of study she is
interested in.

To add insult to injury, she was told that her difficulties resulted
from simply lacking confidence. However, she quite clearly has an
underlying impairment. This impairment came out clearly in her
assessment with us and was consistent with her previous medical and
educational history.

Despite her knowing this was probably the case, she was still devastated
to learn that there was no simple cure for her difficulties. There were
only things she could do to lessen the negative impact. Again, this
harsh reality is never easy to hear, but it is necessary to go through
it to move forward.

Sometimes, moving forwards means admitting that you simply cannot do
something. I am not saying that you then do not do anything and expect
things to work out for you all the time. But that you can recognise and
accept when you cannot do something (with or without help).

To summarise, I believe everybody can achieve incredible things and
should put themselves in frightening positions sometimes. But I do not
think that somebody who is blind can suddenly achieve sight alone by
'putting their mind to it' or just having more confidence in their
vision. The same as somebody who cannot take in written information
efficiently due to an issue with actually processing information can't
suddenly start doing this by being more confident!

**The importance of interacting with other people**

People with autism sometimes have to work harder at getting social
interaction. However, it is all the more important for an autistic
person's development and moving forwards.

It is easy and understandable that many people with autism and
neurodiversity who we support have a wrong belief that we, and others
around them, are faultless. Some believe we can do many things without
difficulty and succeed without shedding blood, sweat, and tears.

No one is perfect. I probably will fail as much as I will achieve. And
that is the same for the autistic people we support who deep down want
employment but do not currently have it, nor know how to get it. We do
not have all the answers. We can help and support them, but 'at the end
of the day' it has to come from them: they have to the effort in.

Some people we work with want everything to be 'just right' before they
do anything (I have a bit of this problem). They worry about the wrong
things. They concern themselves with little issues they can relate to
rather than bigger, fundamental issues. They are concerned that negative
social experiences in the past will repeat.

Sometimes they feel that interacting with other people in the world is
an afterthought and not a fundamental part of moving toward achieving
their goals (for example, employment).

Maybe we should try and communicate to them more that we, as the people
who help them progress, are not immune from struggles. We are all on our
own journey. In fact it is because we struggle that we are able to help
and mentor people. We have 'been there, done that, and got the T-shirt'!

**Putting yourself in 'unsafe' spaces to develop**

To achieve, taking calculated risks is probably the most important thing
anybody can do. You have to give up your security blanket (even if only
for a while) to move forwards. But what is also important is that you
put your faith in the things you cannot control. This ties in with
accepting what impairments you have and working with them (despite how
disabling they can be).

With those people we support, taking risks is sometimes about trying new
things. It includes putting themselves in challenging social situations
and forfeiting their perceived safety.

For example, I used to be very timid of strangers. I often thought
people would bite me (not literally) when I spoke to them. Of course, I
did not want to get bitten. One day I woke up and decided I did not want
to work at my job as a checkout operator in a supermarket anymore. I
decided to hand my notice in that week even though I had no other job.

As I had just got a qualification in Fitness training, I started to go
around all the gyms in my area, talking to the staff, and distributing
my CV. Eventually, I got a job as a fitness instructor at a national gym
chain.

During this period, the gym had a policy to measure performance on the
amount of our 'gym floor interaction'. Head office phoned three members
a day at random who had visited the gym that day and asked them if
anyone on the gym floor (me) had interacted with them. That is, start a
conversation with a stranger out of nowhere!

If the member said no, our score went down. This policy meant I was
monitored regarding my interaction with gym users. To keep my job, I had
to force myself to start conversations with people who were using the
gym (and as I said, I was timid).

The gym was a busy city centre gym in the legal quarter of the city
centre, where people often came to do a short and intense workout on
their lunch break. These circumstances meant that not everybody wanted
to chat, and in fact, some people would be downright horrible if you
interrupted them.

Needless to say, I disliked this interaction policy. However, looking
back, it was a great thing to go though. Now I quite happily talk to
anyone and everyone and better handle rejection. These are useful skills
for running a business.

We need to challenge autistic job seekers to do things they find
uncomfortable to help them to succeed. (Even though they might hate us
at the time!)

**Try not to let fear or negative past experiences hold you back. **

The points I am trying to get across here are quite simple. Truly
helping people with autism & neurodiversity develop and be in successful
employment, often means putting them in difficult situations and
expecting them to cope.

Everyone has limitations that we have to accept. However, this does not
mean shying away from doing anything that makes us feel insecure,
frightened, or overwhelmed. In particular, interaction with other people
is vital to ensure we do not lose sight that life is supposed to include
struggles and that it does for everyone.

Try not to let fear hold you back. Through great adversity and the use
of courage come great things.

**For LinkedIn**: Email me at j.blacow\@aspiedent.com or call me on
07717 404846.

**For website**: [Contact us by email](contact form)
or call us on 07717 404846.
