---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Business networking and autism
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: 25 June 2021
image: NetworkingSelfEmploymentAutism.png
thumbnail: NetworkingSelfEmploymentAutism.jpg
metaTitle: Business networking and autism
metaDescription: Aspiedent focusses on business networking groups, autism in the workplace and autism and self-employment. What is the real point of networking? Includes tips on how to do it.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: In this blog post, we focus on business networking and autism. It took a while for us to figure out the real point of networking and why it is important. Here we try and clearly explain the point and give tips on how to do it right.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
creditURL: https://pixabay.com/users/jmexclusives-10518280/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=5187243
creditText: Image by Joseph Mucira
---
**Networking the right way for autistic and non-autistic professionals**

This blog is focussed on autistic people; however it can help
**anybody** who is unsure about business networking. We all have
preconceptions and challenges to networking when starting out in
business, work, or self-employment.

Networking when you are autistic can be extremely difficult. You could
argue that the 'virtual world' or virtual networking, including social
media, has made it a lot easier for some autistic people.

It has been propagated by some people with autism who are suited to
social media and video chat, or people who are involved in working with
autism in the workplace, that it is now easier for people with autism to
network. They assert that it puts everybody on a more level playing
field, and the social difficulties are less noticeable over a screen.

I do not quite agree. It has made it easier for some people in some
ways, but I can tell you that I work with autistic people for whom it is
not easier - it is much more difficult.

A lot of this is discussed in a still relevant **[blog post from last year](/posts/importance-face-to-face)**
when covid forced us all to go 'online'.

This blog post, however, some of which is inspired by Bergemann's (2015)
book, "An Asperger\'s Guide to Entrepreneurship: Setting Up Your Own
Business for Professionals with Autism Spectrum Disorder", is about
business networking as a whole (in person or face to face).

For this blog post, a network is a way to describe all of the people you
have interacted with/worked with/know of concerning your business and
that you 'get along with'.

You do not have to be close necessarily, but consider yourself to be
able to contact them to ask a question, have a 'business catch up' with,
or refer work to them. In turn, you should be able to expect them to
refer work to you, if or when they come across somebody who is in the
market for precisely what you do.

Bergemann splits a self-employed person\'s network into five different
sub-networks. I have changed these into three networks by combining and
changing some of them to make them simpler. All three of them together I
will call a 'wider network' (some people fall into more than one
category).

**Business Development Networks**

Business development networks are those within your 'wider network' who
you work with mainly to refer work to each other and support each other
to find new opportunities and gain more business. A business development
network is not a customer group, which you sell to. It is a group of
professional acquaintances, working in lots of different sectors, who
you teach to sell your services/products for you. In return, you learn
how to promote their goods or services to your 'wider network' and
advocate for them.

This is why as an autistic individual, it is key to finding a group to
whom you can genuinely refer business, and know that you can trust them
to do a great job in whatever field they are in.

Finding a networking group that is truly open-minded to differences and
disabilities may be tricky, but they are out there. The key is to do
your research and due diligence and try them out properly before you
commit.

**What you sow you will reap**

The key thing to remember with this type of networking is that you often
have to give a lot before you start seeing a return. This might feel
wrong or exploitative, to begin with. However, the idea that the more
you help others in business the more they will want to help you and your
business, is a tried and tested concept.

As an autistic person, you may (not always) have to be particularly wary
of being taken advantage of. One way to make sure this does not happen
too much (some people will always try it on with anyone) is to track
what you are getting in return from your investment of time in other
business contacts.

When you start seeing business opportunities come in your direction from
a networking contact, you can be relatively confident you have got a
good thing going. Sometimes, just getting some sound business advice
from a contact or having them be a listening ear is where the benefit
lies.

**Group networking?**

An autistic self-employed person has told me that they struggle to deal
with large networking groups - they prefer smaller ones. That is OK, as
there are ways to do this without having to be in a room (virtual or
otherwise) with 30 plus other businesses.

You could do it on a 121 basis by reaching out to other business owners
(on LinkedIn messenger, for example) and asking for a meeting to discuss
how you could potentially help each other get more business. Have
regular meetings with these other business owners and eventually you
should start spotting work opportunities for them and receiving business
referrals from them in return.

You can also pool resources and share them. For example, say you are a
videographer in a network with an accountant. You can give them advice
on video marketing, and they can return the favour by giving you some
help with dealing with tax issues. There may be an advantage here to
networking with other autistic people: you might find somebody who is an
absolute whizz at what you are extremely poor at (for example
marketing), but who is hopeless at what you are good at (for example,
IT). You can help each other!

A key thing is that these relationships are well nurtured and also
natural. You may be asked to help somebody and it may be several months
or more than a year until you need their support. If you have helped
them, they will more than likely be very willing to help you if you ask
them. People forget what you said to them, but they do not forget how
you made them feel [Carl W. Buehner](https://quoteinvestigator.com/2014/04/06/they-feel/).

**Strategic networks**

I have changed the definition of strategic networks as outlined in
Bergemann's (2015) book. I would class strategic networks as contacts
from your 'wider network' who are either in a similar market/have a
similar business and/or who will be more likely to come across customers
in the market for your goods or services regularly.

For example, an independent mortgage provider, a financial adviser, and
a wills & probate specialist may be a strong partnership. At my main
networking group, we have something we call power teams. These are
smaller subgroups who meet together regularly to discuss collaboration
opportunities, share market insights, share resources, and learn from
each other.

You will find these types of networking contacts at more specialised
events. For example, if you are an HR professional, you may find a
strategic network (or referral partnership) at an employment law
seminar, or a staff development and people management exhibition.

The most important thing to do when meeting these people to make sure
you follow up with them! Book meetings in with them (on zoom or face to
face) and set out to find out more about them and how you might be able
to help each other. Their wider network will then become your wider
network, too!

If not, you might end up with 500+ contacts on LinkedIn who you have met
once but cannot remember how or why and they become dead contacts. The
key thing on this one, and which will probably be the biggest challenge
for an autistic person who struggles with people, is to keep talking to
your network!

**Personal support networks**

This one is a bit self-explanatory. However, I consider all the contacts
in my 'wider network' who I feel accept me and understand me as a person
(warts and all) to be part of my personal support network.

These are the ones who will not run of in fear if you disclose something
personal about yourself (relevant to your business challenges) which may
not fit into their view of the world. For example, the fact you are
autistic/have Asperger's and therefore struggle with things other people
may find second nature (like doing small talk).

These are the people you can call up and thrash business ideas out with,
or simply get in touch for a chat when you are feeling low (Bergemann
2015). Those who will not judge and can help you resolve business
problems, such as a customer non-payment issue, or the second thoughts
you might have about running your own business.

These contacts could be called friends, but it is important to centre
everything around work and business as if not, things may get
complicated and nothing may get done.

That is not to say you cannot become close friends with someone in your
network. It is just that you may want to find somebody else who is in
their industry to add to your network so that you can focus on the
friendship with the other.

As I often point out to one autistic adult we are currently helping into
employment. Once she finds work, she will find that she will be
surrounded by people with whom she is more likely to benefit from being
friends. I.e. other employed, get up and go people, rather than friends
she has had in the past who have left a lot to be desired in their
friendship, and pulled her back/stopped her moving forward.

**Social media networks**

I consider social media networks as a combination of all three of the
above subnetworks put together. In other words, your social media
network usually includes everybody in your 'wider network'.

Social media networking can be tricky for anybody to navigate. I still
find it a bit daunting, but I have learned two important things:

1.  Engage with people. It is called a social network for a reason. If
    you struggle with small talk or meaningless chitchat, or to stroke
    others\' egos, try and start conversations about people's post
    content or share your insightful experiences about something they
    have posted.

2.  As best you can, try to stay positive. Writing negative things
    online may be how you feel about something. However, it can often be
    hard for people who do not know you, to put into context what you
    are saying. Try to leave strong statements or unpalatable facts for
    your personal support network. An odd few is OK; this shows you are
    a real person and know your stuff. But try to put positive energy
    into social media.

One thing you may want to seek out is a sort of LinkedIn support group
(for example) where you all join a group chat of some sort and post your
social media content in there.

The idea is that each member engages with each other's posts to help
your posts be promoted better across the platform.

One thing to be wary of here, however, is that people sometimes just
comment meaningless things on your posts as they do not understand
enough about your business or market to have a meaningful contribution
to give. You can either put up with this or ask nicely that unless
people have something genuine to say, refrain from commenting!

**In conclusion**

Networking is a lot more than just going and talking to people about
what you do, and listening to other people talk about what they do. It
is much more. Your network needs to be nurtured, much like nurturing any
kind of interpersonal relationship. Eventually, your network should
start producing fruit.

It is about collaboration, support, trust, and helping people to
understand what you do enough (in their terms) so that they can be great
ambassadors for your business. The more people you have in your network,
the more help you get in getting work or being noticed in your area. It
is like expanding your team without having pay-rolled employees.

In return, you must be curious to learn about what other people do and
how you can help them succeed in their business. Sometimes, that may
just be providing a listening ear and or/solving a problem for them
which is easy for you, but hard for them. That is why it is also
important to seek out other businesses who you are confident that they
do what they say they do who you can trust.

If you would like to know more about how we could help
you be self-employed despite autism or neurodiversity, **[please get in touch](/contact)**.
