---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Does the Construction Sector Deserve Neurodiverse People?
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: May 10, 2021, 12:39 PM
image: /assets/blog/Adjustments.jpg
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/Adjustments.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: We found some open-mindedness about employing people with autism or neurodiversity to fill skills gaps or recruit for jobs available in the construction industry. Here we discuss our experiences.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
---
**Thumbnail image:** NeurodiversityInConstruction

**Image credit:** Image
by [Free-Photos](https://pixabay.com/photos/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=768815) from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=768815) 

**Thumbnail title:** Does the Construction Sector Deserve Neurodiverse
People?

**Thumbnail description:** We found some open-mindedness about employing
people with autism or neurodiversity to fill skills gaps or recruit for
jobs available in the construction industry. Here we discuss our
experiences.

**SEO (Meta) Title**: Does the Construction Sector Deserve Neurodiverse
People?

**SEO (Meta) Description:** Aspiedent discuss jobs in the construction
industry and why construction industry employers might find it
beneficial and easier to embrace diversity and inclusion when it comes
to autism, neurodiversity, and filling skills gaps.

**Title:** Does the Construction Sector Deserve Neurodiverse People?

**Does the Construction Sector Deserve Neurodiverse People?**

Aspiedent was once shown around a few building sites run by an
exceptionally large construction company. It became apparent after
meeting a few characters belonging to the senior management team, that
these were workplaces that had people with 'neurodiverse' conditions
(particularly autism) working at every level. 

Neurodiverse conditions include conditions such as Autism, Dyslexia, and
ADHD. 

Interestingly, Aspiedent which is run by an autistic person, Dr
Elizabeth Guest, who is very practical, visual, and very logical but
poor with words, got on really well with these senior construction
professionals.

This prompted us to ask the question - why might this be?

Is it because people who work in construction tend to be more visual and
less verbal and therefore she can communicate with them better? 

Or is it because in general, communication in the construction sector is
far more straight to the point and less 'politically correct' (i.e. more
leeway for people who do not fit in well socially) than other sectors
such as the civil service or some parts of the third sector, for
example. 

Either way, she seems to speak their language. At the construction
company Aspiedent was given a tour around, the Directors got on with
Elizabeth as she had little knowledge about construction but could
understand them and the challenges of their job. I think it helped that
she called a spade a spade, an autistic trait that is often not
appreciated elsewhere.

For sure, it was partly because construction makes sense to Elizabeth. I
would argue it makes sense to her because of her ability to learn
visually and see the bigger picture and detail at the same time (rare in
the general population but more common in autism). This helps her to be
an excellent problem solver.

Not all autistic people fit into this category, but a good number do.

**Why construction?**

One thing we witnessed when talking to people within this particular
construction company was their openness and willingness to explore new
ways of doing things. It is also almost as if they can see a business
case for 'neurodiversity' much more clearly than others.

This company had recognised that they would benefit from employing
somebody who had great attention to detail and who would be able to
elicit information from the various professionals and contractors
involved in big building projects and then log and analyse it.

This is so they could continuously recalculate the costs, timescales,
and materials in stock for a job to be completed whilst making the most
profit and not going over budget or deadlines. It so happened that we
knew an autistic person who had these skills, just not a background in
construction.

It was obvious to them that they had a lot to gain from employing
somebody who had highly developed attention to detail and
problem-solving skills, even if they had to make some adjustments for
their autism and was inexperienced in construction. It was mainly
bluntness and intolerance for mistakes they would have to put up with,
but as mentioned earlier, this was maybe not so much of a problem for
the construction sector.

So if this company could see this, do other construction companies see
it too? Do they want to employ and tap into these talented people who
are too often overlooked due to preconceptions about disability? If not,
then I would argue that those companies maybe do not deserve these
autistic/neurodiverse people!

**Possible benefits**

One of my family members is heavily dyslexic, however, he is renowned
for his quality of work as a professional Painter and Decorator.

I have a suspicion that his lack of certain skills is made up for by his
talents in his trade. When he paints windowsills, they are so perfectly
finished that it is hard to believe that mere human hands painted them.
His fees reflect this, and his finished jobs are routinely admired by
his customers, colleagues, and friends. He is never short of work.

Although his perfectionism and anxiety can cause him difficulty in life,
his commitment to doing a good job and his organisation and planning
skills are revered.

We have also come across another autistic business owner in the painting
field who is actively looking to recruit other autistic people, as he
can see the benefit in employing other people who think differently.

The \'down-to-earth\' culture of the majority of construction businesses
may well suit people with autism who have struggled to 'fit in'
throughout their life. There may be more leeway for people who are
naturally blunt in their communication style and who may fail to follow
certain social rules sometimes (common in autism). 

In addition, many clever people end up coming out of school with no
academic qualifications due to their neurodiverse condition. It may be
that construction is a place that makes room for more people with
neurodiversity because of the traditional apprenticeship/learning by
doing way of getting into this line of work. 

People who learn by doing, visual thinkers, logical thinkers, and
creative thinkers are synonymous with many (not all) people with
autism/neurodiversity and the aptitudes required to succeed at jobs in
construction, engineering, and manufacturing. 

Finally, there is a lot of focus on corporate social responsibility in
construction as many contracts are won based on ticking boxes that
commit the employer to show they are trying their best to be more
inclusive and diverse. 

In a nutshell, the benefits that can be derived from employing more
people with neurodiversity could enable construction companies to work
more efficiently, tap into more skills (i.e. problem-solving) and make
more profit. It can also be argued that people with neurodiversity often
place a great deal of importance in doing a good job and take pride in
their work, as they can be used to struggling in other areas of their
life, for example socially or academically.

**What's Important **

It is important not to forget that it will not all be good, and like all
sectors I am confident there are bad sides to it such as unhealthy
competition, lack of awareness or tolerance of some particular
differences, and instances of workplace bullying. 

Historically, these male-dominated working environments have been very
concerned with the health and safety of their workers and therefore
their HR departments and HR Managers (in the past known as personnel
departments or personnel managers), were there to look after the
wellbeing of the workforce.

More recently, in construction, there has been greater awareness of the
importance of mental wellbeing in the workplace and how the culture of
an industry may stigmatise and isolate workers who suffer from mental
illness and/or emotional distress. 

Perhaps this is a good opportunity to introduce a new (old) form of HR
that is not just focused on the management of the productiveness of a
workforce but also on the health and wellbeing and healthy differences
between employees within the construction sector. I would argue that a
greater (real) understanding of neurodiversity would go a long way to
getting this right.

**For LinkedIn**: Do you have any thoughts on the construction industry,
neurodiversity, or anything else discussed above? If so, please comment
for discussion as I would love to hear your thoughts. Contact me on
07717 404846 or on <j.blacow@aspiedent.com>, or comment on this post.

**For website**: To discuss anything with us that has been touched upon
in this blog, please contact us through our website, e-mail us at
infoáspiedent.com or phone us on 07717 404846.
