---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Neurodiversity in the workplace
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: Jul 23, 2021, 3:11 PM
image: /assets/blog/NeurodiversityWorkplace.jpg
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/NeurodiversityWorkplace.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: Keeping the conversation and neurodiversity in the workplace as realistic as possible is important. Not everyone with autism and neurodiversity will suddenly bring innovation, superpowers, or an unstoppable work ethic into a company. Whilst there are certainly benefits to have a neurodiverse workforce, in order for it to be successful we need to take of our rose-tinted glasses or we risk setting false expectations of people and excluding the very people we are trying to include.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
---
**Thumbnail image:** NeurodiversityWorkplace

**Image credit**: Image
by [MICHOFF](https://pixabay.com/users/michoff-10798847/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=3860037) from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=3860037) 

**Thumbnail title:** Neurodiversity in the workplace

**Thumbnail description:** Keeping the conversation and neurodiversity
in the workplace as realistic as possible is important. Not everyone
with autism and neurodiversity will suddenly bring innovation,
superpowers, or an unstoppable work ethic into a company. Whilst there
are certainly benefits to have a neurodiverse workforce, in order for it
to be successful we need to take of our rose-tinted glasses or we risk
setting false expectations of people and excluding the very people we
are trying to include.

**SEO (Meta) Title:** Aspiedent on the reality of autism and
neurodiversity in the workplace

**SEO (Meta) Description:** What can you actually expect of a
neurodiverse workforce? Aspiedent discusses the reality of autism and
neurodiversity in the workplace.

**I employed a genius with autism, but it did not go very well... **

Well, the above is not exactly true. Elizabeth Aspiedent's founder is
autistic, and she is a genius. 

But while we manage a small autism training & consultancy company,
Aspiedent CIC, and we have employed autistic people, not all have been
super intelligent.  

I am wary of the benefit of mantras such as 'all people with autism are
intelligent, good at systematisation, and would rather work hard than
socialise'. That 'businesses are *simply* missing out on untapped
talent, wasted skills', and so on...

Hands up, I am guilty of reciting variations of the above statements.
But it is not as straightforward as this, even though it might feel good
to say it. 

Why do I need to say this? Well, although it is certainly worth
employing people with neurodiverse conditions, there can often be a
difficult side to it. Representing it as all purely positive & rewarding
is setting up false expectations for employers. 

Perhaps worse, it is also making it more difficult for autistic adults
(and there are many) that don't come armed with special superpowers and,
for example, an ability to sit and work solidly for hours on end,
solving complex problems.

We do however come across a lot who are averagely intelligent, kind,
loyal, hard-working, determined, and caring individuals but who have
social communication and other difficulties which have held them back
and who require understanding and patience from employers. Not all
autistic people have these skills either (as don't all people in
general). 

I think for employers to benefit from a neurodiverse workforce, we need
to be more realistic about what they can expect from employees with
neurodiversity. Indeed, many caring employers already are, as they have
experienced problems in the workplace due to different ways of thinking,
and call upon Aspiedent to help them solve these issues in the
workplace. 

**Being realistic**

Take our Founder, Dr. Elizabeth Guest. Under the right conditions and
with the right type of personalities around her, she thrives. She will
easily solve many resource-draining problems that you cannot solve in
your organisation. Indeed, even ones you think are impossible to solve.

Given the opportunity, she can explain some of the most challenging
workplace issues. For example, where and why productivity is being lost.
She will then proceed to provide solutions so cheap and simple that you
will not believe that they will work!

But along the way, she might inadvertently intimidate your other team
members due to her extensive understanding of their subject. Or, her
hypersensitivity to noise may cause tensions in the office due to
disagreements about what is and is not an acceptable level of noise.
Indeed, her extreme desire for truth at the expense of people's feelings
could cause some very tricky to navigate HR issues. This is just one
case example.

**Is employing people with neurodiversity good for business?** 

We often see in the media that employing people with autism and
neurodiversity is good for business. I would agree and say that in
certain cases, yes.

On the other hand, employers may fear that it would create more problems
within a team. In certain circumstances, it might, at least initially.
But this can be true for any new employee trying to fit into an
established team! Raising awareness about different ways of thinking in
the workplace (autism-related or not), and then knowing what to do about
them, may very well improve workplace harmony and productivity. 

**Embracing differences at work**

Consider our training & consultancy organisation, Aspiedent. People
often say that they see Dr. Elizabeth Guest and me as a double act and
that our strengths and weakness dovetail nicely. I am inclined to
agree. 

Elizabeth is fundamentally logical and has particular ways of thinking
that are rare in most people. Although this is highly valuable, it
causes her social communication difficulties. Social communication
difficulties which are at the core of the diagnostic criteria for
autism. She needs support in this area. 

We both acknowledge this, which means we have to be mindful when
Elizabeth is dealing with customer-facing aspects of her job or trying
to engage with social media.

On the other hand, I have high emotional intelligence which means I am
especially good with our customers. However, I have poor problem-solving
skills, cannot comprehend numbers and I have OCD, which means that it
can take me a while to grasp something important or to learn a new
skill. For this, I need significant input and patience from Elizabeth.

**Staying realistic**

So while we are embracing our differences and even benefitting from
them, we have to stay realistic and accept that having neurodiversity
within an organisation is not always a smooth ride. But that is fine!
When is it ever a smooth ride when it comes down to people?

It is vital employers properly understand what they are letting
themselves in for when embracing neurodiversity in the workplace. It is
not just a fashionable trend or a quick win. Nor should it be a
bandwagon to jump on or simply a kitemark with no real substance behind
it. 

For example, did you know that not all neurodiverse people accept that
they are just different, not disabled, or simply disabled by society? 

Were you aware that many people with autism do not have special skills
or abilities and are quite average in their skill set? Probably. But an
unbelievable amount of people continuously claim 'superpowers' and
'genius' to promote autistic people to employers. 

We want to cut through the noise and the soundbites and actually help
employers feel 100% confident in managing staff with autism or
Asperger's. We want to help employers to keep it real and save them from
getting lost in the false narratives promoted about autism, which
although may sound good and make people feel good, do not help employers
to truly make the most out of their autistic (and non-autistic) people. 

These things are vital to know when claiming to be a truly inclusive and
diverse organisation. 

It is something that requires commitment and effort but in the end, if
done correctly, it will pay off dividends. 

Neurodiversity is different from other forms of diversity, because there
are infinite amounts of diversity within neurodiversity!

In Aspiedent's example, fundamental differences (both strengths and
weaknesses) if treated properly, actually combine to make us a powerful
team and a force to be reckoned with. We also appreciate each other's
strengths and accept each other's weaknesses, as we understand why each
other has them. I'm sure we drive each other up the wall at times. But
knowing why helps us be more tolerant and kinder. 

If we did not understand our underlying differences, we probably would
not work together so well, and could potentially be averse to working
with each other. I'm sure this is happening in other organisations where
two different thinkers literally can't see eye to eye (see things from
each other's perspective). 

The key thing is that we have learned that these strengths and
weaknesses exist, and the underlying cause of them. Instead of ignoring
them, we acknowledge them, and we work with them (not against them).
This creates a successful and truly diverse working environment.

Essentially, we teach others how to do this. 

**For LinkedIn:** If you would like to learn more about how to do this
in your workplace, why not book on our [training for employers in
September ]or[ contact us for a chat. ]

**For website:** If you would like to learn more about how to do this in
your workplace, why not [book on our employer training]
or [contact us for a chat].
