---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: At last! Introducing Aspiedent’s New Logo
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile', 'symptoms', 'severe']
date: May 13, 2021, 8:58 PM
image: Aspiedent2021.png
thumbnail: Aspiedent2021.jpg
metaTitle: About Aspiedent Autism & Neurodiversity Training’s Logo
metaDescription: Aspiedent Autism & Neurodiversity Training & Consultancy’s brand values include excellence, honesty and integrity and moving forwards.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: This post is about Aspiedent CIC’s brand values, our new logo and how the two connect. Aspiedent’s values include excellence, freedom of expression of thought and opinion, and a focus on moving forward and growing.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
creditURL: www.aspiedent.com
creditText: Aspiedent CIC
---
We have been told in the past Aspiedent's Logo needs improving. Some
people might have well had said it was naff! We did not hurry to change
it because it was not the right time. We also try not to rush into
things and instead make sure everything is right. That's how we like to
do work.

Things finally aligned recently, causing Elizabeth our Managing Director
to spontaneously produce a new logo design which I was then able to
feedback on in terms of the design, colours, and how it could fit in
with the brand values of Aspiedent.

Here is our new logo, its feature, and how it fits with our brand
values:

**Jigsaw Puzzle Pieces**

At the risk of upsetting some parts of the internet, we have decided to
use an idea based on the traditional universally recognised
autism-related sign of the jigsaw puzzle.

Some, but by no means all, autistic people believe that the traditional
blue jigsaw puzzle piece which is used as a logo for many autism-related
organisations is an insult to autistic people. They maintain that
organisations who have used it oppress people with autism (or autistic
people, as they do not like 'person with autism' either for similar
reasons).

We refuse to be put off because of this and find the jigsaw serves to
represent what Aspiedent does very well. 

Why?

***Value 1: Excellence***

Aspiedent is especially good at taking extremely complex and confusing
autistic traits (which could be compared to the pieces of a jigsaw) and
putting them all together as a whole that makes sense and can then be
worked with. In turn, the autistic person is helped massively because
suddenly their past makes sense and they can start to really move
forward to a better future.

The jigsaw puzzle represents the complexity of some of the problems we
are solving. We call this interlocking of several jigsaw pieces (traits)
'Autism Profiles'. Autism Profiles are particularly helpful for people
classed as
[neurodiverse](https://aspiedent.com/index.php/autism-information/neurodiversity),
as they are usually the ones who need help understanding themselves. But
our 'Autism Profiles' work on anybody and everybody (thus linking into
our inclusive approach).

***Value 2: True inclusivity***

Some autistic people dislike puzzle pieces as a logo because it is
historically connected with organisations to whom they are opposed. We
are fully aware of these views and arguments but think that it is
important to look forward and not back (another value of Aspiedent).

There are different views and experiences among all autistic people, and
it is important we do not shut out people by banning symbols or
terminology that autistic people without a voice might find useful. And
anyway, we are using lots of jigsaw pieces, not just one and we have
completed the puzzle!

***Value 3: Constant Research & Development***

Aspiedent is invested in constant research and development. We are
constantly refining our autism profiling tool and developing better
techniques to help people move towards their goals. However, why
eradicate the past (shut down opposing views of autism and autism
interventions). Why not just be mindful of this and find a better way
forward?

Discussion about these potentially difficult topics lead to better ideas
and therefore better services and this links back to our values of
excellence and inclusivity. This is because that is how we learn more,
avoid existing in an echo chamber, and therefore encourage diversity.

***Value 4: Freedom of expression of thought and opinion***

As touched upon above, we work on the basis that we are open and value
open debate and welcome discussion. It is important to be open-minded if
we want to really help autistic people thrive. Especially since part of
our mission is to help autistic people thrive in a world which is full
of opposing views, beliefs and opinions.

***Value 5: Focus on moving forward and growing***

Also, we are an autistic-led organisation, representing a truly diverse
set of autistic people. The only real criteria we have when deciding who
we can help and who we can't is whether they are prepared to put in the
hard work required from them to move forward towards their goals,
despite often severe difficulties.

**Infinity Symbol**

The Infinity symbol has also been adopted by many who are invested in
autism as an alternative to the jigsaw piece. We incorporated the
mathematical infinity symbol (the 8-shaped symbol), to represent the
fact that there is a very large number (more that 40 thousand last time
Elizabeth tried to calculate it) of different autisms. Each autistic
person has their own unique combination of autistic traits to varying
levels of severity.

The small gold stripe in the logo's infinity symbol indicates that
despite the difficult and confusing symptoms associated with autism,
there is often a particular skill or aptitude that can add real value to
the business of an employer possessed by those autistic people who are
able to work. This can range from being brilliant at problem solving, or
being very creative to loving boring and repetitive jobs which require
very high attention to detail.

***Value 6: Quality***

We use gold along with purple in our logo to represent quality. Our
service is very high quality and due to this sometimes considered
'expensive'. It is high value for money. Aspiedent is the *Rolls Royce*
of autism services. If we do not think we can help somebody, we will not
try.

***Value 7: Honesty and Integrity***

Linked to the openness about our cost and our specialties and
limitations, is the importance of working with honesty and integrity. To
work successfully with autistic people, you need a high level of honesty
and integrity. Autistic people are generally (not always) extremely
honest.

We are honest with organisations and individuals. If we do not think we
can help them, or think they are not suited to working with us, we tell
them with reasons.

**Colours**

As mentioned above, as well as gold, we use purple to represent luxury.
We do not provide one size fits all solutions when we help businesses
benefit from a deeper understanding of autism and neurodiversity.

Aspiedent's services are bespoke for both the employer and the
individual with autism. Linked to honesty and integrity, we would be
acting unethically if we tried to deliver a service without first
understanding the underlying issues causing the symptoms or
difficulties. It is about putting the right person in the right job and
providing the right solution to the particular problem first time.

***Value 8: Ethical practice***

We use the income from our employer customers, to help those who are the
hardest to help. Those who have been on every autism work programme out
there and/or who are already employed and highly qualified, but failing
to retain or even gain a job because of some complexity in their
situation caused by their autism, and their own and others poor
understanding of it.

We use green to represent growth and nature. It symbolises the infinite
variety (and beauty) of nature and its continuous cycle. The variety and
beauty of nature is fascinating. We are also fascinated by how different
autistic people tick and how their underlying difficulties explain the
surface symptoms. We love putting the pieces together into a coherent
whole that explains all the autistic symptoms and the difficulties the
autistic person experiences as well as their strengths. 

There are many values we try and uphold, including having the humility
to admit when we have been wrong and/or made a mistake.

So to bring them all together, some of Aspiedent's values are:

**Value 1: Excellence**

**Value 2: True inclusivity**

**Value 3: Constant Research & Development**

**Value 4: Focus on moving forward and growing**

**Value 5: Freedom of expression of thought and opinion**

**Value 6: Quality**

**Value 7: Honesty and Integrity**

**Value 8: Ethical practice**

A combination of the jigsaw puzzle and a purple and gold infinity sign
and green background really does represent what we do. We make the
complex simple and work effectively with any and every combination of
autistic traits presented to us. We nurture growth, development, and
fruition in every autistic and neurodiverse person and employer or
business that we help. 

Thanks for reading.

Get in touch here, email me <j.blacow@aspiedent.com> or call us at 07717
404846.
