---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Resources for Autistic Employees and their Employers - The Autistic Community
tag: movie
date: Jul 29, 2020, 1:14 PM
image: /social.jpg
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: The Autistic Community can be a useful resource for employers and employees with autism, but it can be confused with expert autism training.
---
**RESOURCES FOR EMPLOYERS AND EMPLOYEES: The Autistic Community**

People who identify with their diagnosis of autism, are sometimes
referred to as the 'autistic community'.

This community can be a source of help for employers and employees with
autism.

While we would argue that the autistic community is not representative
of all autistic people, (but only those with certain 'types' of autism),
there is a vocal activist component of said autistic community, who
campaign for workplaces to be autism friendly.

This is good right? Actually, it depends.

Although many autistic autism advocates do have some understanding of
autism, it is rarer for them to understand the needs of those who are
not autistic. That's a big mistake!

In fact, misunderstandings on behalf of the autistic and non-autistic
populations works both ways. It is right to be careful when taking
advice from anywhere, including when seeking advice from the autistic
community about how to manage autism in the workplace.

**Pitfall 1: The Autistic Autism Speaker**

It can be very valuable to have an autistic person put themselves out
there and talk to people about their own experiences about being
autistic, as it can reduce fear about the condition and raise awareness.
But there is a tendency for some autistic people to teach people only
about their own autism. Unfortunately, this may be completely the
opposite to another person's autistic issues and experience of being
autistic!

There are also many people who would argue that simply being autistic is
a qualification to teach other people about the whole spectrum of
autism. (It is not in case you were wondering!)

It has been known for autistic people to stand up in the workplace and
talk about their experience of being autistic (often for free) and have
this be called 'autism training'.

This is worrying because it can devalue all autism training and can
actually be quite exploitative of the autistic person. It then also
means that autism training is often expected for a very low fee or even
for free (my pet hate).

In fact, to get really good quality autism training (that will actually
improve the workplace so that it makes more profit and becomes more
productive - the primary objective of business) you do have to invest a
reasonable amount of money in autism training!

It is also incorrect to assume that because a person is autistic
themselves, then they have a complete understanding of the depth and
breadth of autism and can come into the workplace, talk about their
experiences, and suddenly everybody is trained in understanding autism!

I reiterate, there is a place for autistic people to deliver their life
stories, and it is recognised that audiences respond well to this
tugging on the emotional heart strings. But this can easily get confused
with proper, scientific and research-led training about autism. I am
pleased to tell you that is what Aspiedent prides itself on.

The advice here is to try to be aware that there is a big difference
between somebody telling a group about their *own* experience of autism,
and somebody (autistic or not) training a group to understand autism as
a whole.

**Pitfall 2: Mutual Misunderstanding **

Sometimes, there is little understanding by the autistic community of
the needs of the non-autistic people.

There are a lot of complaints (and sometimes quite rightly) from the
autistic community that standard working environments and practices do
not accommodate autistic people.

For example, work Christmas parties can be a nightmare for somebody with
autism who because of sensory issues, cannot cope with busy noisy
environments for very long.

Or, when the need to understand complex office politics at work is too
much to ask from somebody who has social difficulties because of their
autism.

But autistic autism activists often campaign for environments that will
make many (but certainly not all) autistic people comfortable, but which
will actually make working life for many non-autistic people (the larger
segment of the population) extremely uncomfortable!

Aspiedent undertake workplace assessments to help managers and autistic
employees to understand each other better thus work together positively
and productively. We have done a workplace assessment for someone who
wanted to ban people in their workplace from meeting socially and face
to face in order to create a 'level playing field' for themselves as an
autistic employee.

You can probably understand why this was not realistic. But then again,
perhaps COVID 19 has now delivered on this.

The point I am making here is that just as non-autistic people are
expected under the equalities act to make adjustments for autistic
employees, those with autism need to accommodate non autistic people.

If this is not considered, then actually real, meaningful equality for
autistic people in the workplace is unlikely be achieved.

Related to this, is a misunderstanding on behalf of the autistic
community of what are 'reasonable' adjustments for an employer to make.

**Pitfall 3: Unreasonable Reasonable Adjustments **

The social model of disability is often strongly pushed by autistic
activists and autism training companies. Looking through the lens of the
social model, workplaces are seen as the problem and it would be argued
that an autistic person is not disabled by their autism, but disabled by
the workplace environment because it does not cater for their needs. In
other words, the workplace should change to remove all barriers for them
(irrespective of what barriers that raises for other people).

We know when we do a Workplace Assessment with someone who has been
strongly influenced by autistic activism or the 'neurodiversity
movement', because they turn up with a long list of 'reasonable
adjustments' they would like, many of which are just not reasonable.

This is in opposition to the medical model of disability which sees
autism as a problem to be 'fixed'. In this model the onus is on the
autistic person to adapt to the workplace and muddle through somehow.

Clearly, neither approach is ideal.

Aspiedent's approach is a combination of both models (the social model
to us is completely unrealistic). In fact, when we do workplace
assessments for neurodiverse individuals, as well as recommending
reasonable adjustments for the employer, we often recommend the employee
makes some, too!

This is always well received by both the employer and the employee.
Aspiedent is run by somebody with autism, so it is not easy for an
autistic employee to claim that we do not know how difficult things can
be for them. We do.

What is important is that we help the employee and manager to meet in
the middle when it comes to workplace reasonable adjustments, which is a
realistic way forward.

If you would like to know more about helping yourself, your manager, or your employee with autism or neurodiversity related issues, please use our get in touch via our contact us form or email Jen at <j.blacow@aspiedent.com>.
