---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Autism friendly management style – servant leadership?
tag: movie
date: Oct 22, 2021, 6:06 PM
image: /social.jpg
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: The blog post attempts to answer the question - how can we make workplaces more autism and neurodiversity friendly, without interfering with the needs of most of the population…? Servant leadership as a management style could be an option to enable an autism friendly working environment.
---
I think you need to reorganise this and change some of the wording.
Switch the last and first sections around.

Something you are missing is the transition from a small organisation to
a large organisation. In a small organisation, it is much easier to care
for each other, everyone knows everyone else. This came out with Connor
on Tuesday. He knows everyone in the UK, but not the team in China. This
has created a disconnect between the two teams.

But as an organisation grows you have to change the structure because it
becomes impossible for everyone to know everyone else. This is actually
a challenge for a large organisation. After a while, those at the top
don't know all their employees.

For an autistic person joining a large organisation, expecting them to
get to know lots of people is completely unrealistic.

I think the limit is that people can know 150 people and after that it
gets impersonal.

There is a big problem with the word 'love' at the moment much hate uses
'love' to hide what it really is. Like you exclude people in the name of
'inclusion'.

Us

Other people

Recommendations

Wording

~~Recently I was asked the question: how can we make workplaces more
autism friendly, without interfering with the needs of most of the
population for relationship building via the emotional reciprocation of
social interaction?~~

~~Good question. ~~

I think the short answer is... a true understanding of the people you
work with or employ, and love.

Love for your colleagues or employees is the thing that I believe would
make any working relationship worthwhile having, work.

Not romantic love, but the type of that one might have for a close
brother or a sister.

I think many people would say that this is an awful lot to ask.

The long answer is below...

**Do neurodiversity profiles on everyone = Understanding**

In the [last blog post](link to that blog post), I tried to emphasise that a person's
neurodiversity profile generally remains constant during all
interactions. Please remember neurodiversity profiling is not
personality profiling... it's very different. e

If a person has a particularly idiosyncratic way of thinking, then they
will generally always think in that way.

Understanding (all) staff and managers neurodiversity profiles, and
having them documented somewhere, is actually extremely valuable.

One way that might help autistic people access the workplace, would be
to have a protocol that upon employment, every staff member must be
profiled.

A profile comes with recommendations for how to get the best out of the
person, how they can the best out of themselves and helps to clearly and
accurately explain their differences to others.

This means that autistic people who might have a very spiky profile are
not singled out from other employees. It would also allow an employer to
pick up on any neurodiversity within a person, that may affect the
workplace straight away.

This would be valuable because straight away, other members of the team
would be able to view the person's profile and know the best way to
communicate with them, who the best people are to ask what, and what
things are likely to cause difficulty and either mitigate against them
or avoid them.

There are protection issues here. Someone could exploit this
information.

For example, if Mike's profile said 'thinks in bigger picture and
details', the people who know that they can only see details (which will
be on their own profile), could go to Mike when they are lost and need
the bigger picture explaining to them. Not sure this would work very
well.

If Susie's profile says, 'processes verbal information slowly', you
would then know that in a meeting, Suzy is not the best person to ask to
take notes in meetings!

HOWEVER, you would know that it's probably a good idea to chat to Susie
a week after said meeting because she could remember more of it (far
more than anyone else) as she will just processed all the information
(albeit slowly) and could maybe have processed more than anyone else.

Her brain just takes longer to process verbal information because it
captures every detail. But she may be the person who subsequently had
the best ideas based on the content of the meeting as she has been
processing it for a week!

These are just a couple hypothetical of examples, but how much easier
would it be if we were able to see 'inside' somebody's head before
working or interacting with them?

How many people who would normally get dismissed due to
misunderstandings would be retained due to others being clued into
everybody else's different ways of thinking/feeling/perceiving, etc.

One thing that would have to be factored in though is that knowledge is
power and although it can help understanding other people to this
degree, it can also be used as a weapon. How people think about,
perceive and sense the world can be used against them if such knowledge
got into the wrong hands.

**The organisation that cater for autistic & non-autistic people =
Love**

~~Often people with autism are bullied at work. Sometimes this is
because they don't understand the social stuff, politics of the
organisation and the significance of emotional reciprocation of social
interaction. ~~

~~One way to discourage bullies being promoted could be servant
leadership. ~~

~~Colleen Barret who is the president emerita of [South West
Airlines](https://www.southwest.com/), a successful airline which
practices servant leadership, once said that she spent 85% of her time
delivering proactive customer service to her employees! Her most
important priorities were her employees.~~

~~She was deputy to South West's Chairman Herb Kelleher for many years,
who is quite a remarkable man. Herb did not see rank and rungs on a
ladder, he never embarrassed his team when they did something silly, and
he treated the team as complete equals to him ([Knowledge Wharton,
2008](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6TgR95vnM0c)). ~~

~~Imagine if, rather than managers being given teams of staff to manage
progression in an organisation meant being given a group of staff whom
they are expected to nurture and develop (both real nurture and
development need an injection of love). Concern and caring? Do you need
to like them?~~

~~Indeed, many HR professionals and the [Chartered Institute for
Professional Development (CIPD),](https://www.cipd.co.uk/) who are the
professional body for human resource management professionals, are
incredibly interested both the wellbeing and the learning and
development of people. ~~

~~The person who is 'nurturing' the junior staff should have somebody
above them who they can seek guidance and assurance and supervision from
-- essentially who is nurturing them. This could go all the way up until
there is a solid, core team at the top supporting each other. ~~

~~Of course, it won't be utopia, and there will still be methods of
discipline, dismissal and people issues. With real nurture, comes
consequences of actions of one's actions and boundaries. ~~

~~If you told a person likely to purposefully make trouble and/or
trample on other people to get what they want, that the only thing they
get to look forward to upon promotion, is a set of newer or less
experienced individuals to nurture, they would likely run a mile! Or
they might not: they might relish the power over others.~~

~~Especially if they knew that if they did not perform well at this --
of course with help and support from their supervisors, they would not
progress. ~~

~~Honest (but constructive) feedback should also be expected not just
from the nurturer and their team, but from the team back to the
nurturer. This would be off putting to a somebody who was not a genuine
team player. ~~

~~If someone is not performing as they should, this is addressed quickly
and the whole point of this is to find a way to help the person do
better. ~~

~~Freedom of thought and opinion would also be key, but as long as there
was no hateful intent behind this. There is a BIG difference between
freedom of thought/belief and hate and unfortunately today's world
doesn't seem to understand this.~~

~~It may seem very scary to business leaders to adopt some form of
servant leadership and thus let go of some control. But, do you really
want people who you have to micromanage and are not able to trust to do
their best, and come and ask when they need help?~~

I think you maybe should first go over the values. Honesty and integrity
throughout the organisation are key for this to work. Using the idea of
love in an organisation feels very strange.

**~~Experimenting with new ways of working~~**

~~At Aspiedent, we have never been keen on the traditional hierarchy
model. Due to our disability related inability to micromanage people
(Elizabeth and I have enough work trying to manage ourselves) we are
thinking about new ways of working.~~

~~Elizabeth's autism severely reduces her ability to deal with people.
She is only able to deal with people in a limited capacity. Therefore
when 'managing' people at work, she kind of adopts servant leadership.
~~

~~In order for her to cope with people and get the best out of them, she
almost treats them like MA or PhD students. She is there for them when
they need help, but she leaves them to their own devices (to an extent)
and expects them to get on with their work in between to the best of
their ability. She expects people to take ownership of their work. ~~

~~This approach also allows us to adopt management techniques which work
for each to each individual. The employee that prefers to get on with
what they are doing and have regular catch ups... she's there for them
for regular scheduled supervision meetings. If an employee needs regular
input (i.e. daily) she tries to be there for them when they need it
until they get to a point when they can be more independent. ~~

~~It's almost like treating employees like consultancy clients... they
approach us when they need input, we guide them, and then send them back
on their merry way. ~~

~~At the end of the day, we have love for each other, and the people we
work with. We put the less fortunate and needy in front of ourselves.
Love & understanding equals compassion, and is a key part of what we are
all about. ~~

~~I believe that if you build an organisation on the foundations of
love, compassion and understanding, you will create an environment that
is all diversity friendly. ~~

In the bible there are two kinds of love. Romantic love and brotherly
love. Today the idea of 'love' has got completely twisted. The above
could be completely misunderstood.

**Thumbnail image:** ServantLeadership

**Image credit:** Image by [Saroj
Kumar](https://pixabay.com/users/sarojkumar7054-16470832/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=5153888) from Pixabay 

**Thumbnail title:** Autism friendly management style -- servant
leadership?

**Thumbnail description:** The blog post attempts to answer the
question: how can we make workplaces more autism and neurodiversity
friendly, without interfering with the needs of most of the
population...? Servant leadership as a management style could be an
option to enable an autism friendly working environment.

**SEO (Meta) Title:** Autism friendly employers and neurodiversity
friendly employers

**SEO (Meta) Description:** Aspiedent discusses autism friendly
employers and neurodiversity friendly employers and a management style
that could be adopted.

Autism friendly management style -- servant leadership?
=======================================================

Recently I was asked the question: how can we make workplaces more
autism friendly, without interfering with the needs of most of the
population for relationship building via the emotional reciprocation of
social interaction?

It is a good question and one which has never really been successfully
answered.

What I can tell you that is key, are good values. Honesty and integrity
throughout an organisation are vital when making any organisation more
autism or neurodiversity friendly. 

**Experimenting with new ways of working**

At Aspiedent, we have never been keen on the traditional hierarchy
model. Due to our disability related inability to micromanage people
(Elizabeth and I have enough work trying to manage ourselves), we are
thinking about new ways of working.

Elizabeth's autism severely reduces her ability to deal with people. She
is only able to deal with people in a limited capacity. Therefore when
'managing' people at work, she kind of adopts servant leadership. 

To cope with people and get the best out of them, she almost treats them
like MA or PhD students. She is there for them when they need help, but
she leaves them to their own devices (to an extent). She expects them to
get on with their work in between to the best of their ability and to
ask for help when they get stuck. She likes people to take ownership of
their work

This approach also allows us to adopt management techniques that work
for each individual. The employee that prefers to get on with what they
are doing and have regular catch-ups... she's there for them for
regularly scheduled supervision meetings. If an employee needs regular
input (for example, daily) she tries to be there for them when they need
it until they get to a point when they can be more independent. 

It is almost like treating employees like consultancy clients... they
approach us when they need input, guide them, and then send them back on
their merry way. 

At the end of the day, we care about each other, and the people we work
with. We try and put the less fortunate and needy in front of ourselves.
Being compassionate is important to us. 

I believe that if you build an organisation that truly cares about its
people, you will create an environment that is all diversity friendly. 

**Autism friendly working environments?**

Often people with autism or neurodiversity are bullied at work.
Sometimes this is because they do not understand the social stuff,
politics of the organisation, and the significance of emotional
reciprocation of social interaction. 

One way to discourage bullies from being promoted could be servant
leadership. 

Colleen Barret who is the president emerita of [South West
Airlines](https://www.southwest.com/), a successful airline that
practices servant leadership, once said that she spent 85% of her time
delivering proactive customer service to her employees!

Her most important priorities were her employees.

She was deputy to South West's Chairman Herb Kelleher for many years,
who is quite a remarkable man. Herb did not see rank and rungs on a
ladder, he never embarrassed his team when they did something silly, and
he treated the team as complete equals to him ([Knowledge Wharton,
2008](https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6TgR95vnM0c)). 

Imagine if, rather than managers being given teams of staff to manage,
progression in an organisation meant overseeing a group of staff they
are expected to serve (nurture and develop). To provide nurture, and
develop people, you need to care about them and be honest with them. 

Indeed, many Human Resource professionals and the [Chartered Institute
for Professional Development (CIPD),](https://www.cipd.co.uk/) the
professional body for HR, are incredibly interested in the wellbeing and
learning, and development of people. 

The person who is 'nurturing' the junior staff should have somebody
above them who they can seek guidance and assurance and supervision from
-- essentially who is nurturing them. This could go all the way up until
there is a solid, core team at the top supporting each other. At any one
time, each employee will only really deal with their core team. However,
the one serving that team would also deal with their supervisor (the one
serving them). 

Of course, it will not be a utopia, and there will still be methods of
discipline, dismissal, and people issues. With nurture, comes
consequences of actions of one's actions and boundaries. 

If you told a person likely to purposefully make trouble and/or trample
on other people to get what they want, that the only thing they get to
look forward to upon promotion, is a set of newer or less experienced
individuals to nurture (not 'manage'), it might put them off. 

If you told them their job was to serve their employees and not the
other way around, it might send them running. Especially if they knew
that if they did not perform well at this -- of course with help and
support from their supervisor, they would not progress. 

Honest (and constructive) feedback should also be expected, not just
from the nurturer and their team, but from the team back to the
nurturer. This would be off-putting to somebody who was not a genuine
team player. 

If someone is not performing as they should, this is addressed quickly
with the whole point of the processing being to find a way to help the
person do better.

Freedom of thought and opinion would also be key, but as long as there
was no hateful intent behind this. There is a BIG difference between
freedom of thought/belief and hate. Unfortunately, today's world doesn't
seem to understand this.

It may seem very scary to business leaders to adopt some form of servant
leadership. But, do you want people who you have to micromanage and who
are not able to trust to do their best, and come and ask when they need
help?

**Understanding all employees**

In the [last blog post](link to that blog post), I tried to emphasise that a
person's neurodiversity profile generally remains constant during all
interactions. Please remember neurodiversity profiling is not
personality profiling... it's very different.

If a person has a particularly idiosyncratic way of thinking, then they
will generally always think in that way. 

Understanding (all) staff and managers\' neurodiversity profiles, and
having them documented somewhere, could be extremely valuable. (As well
as dangerous, so we would have to find a way of protecting this
information). 

One way that might help autistic people access the workplace, would be
to have a protocol that upon employment, every staff member must be
profiled. 

A profile comes with recommendations for how to get the best out of the
person, how they can get the best out of themselves, and helps to
clearly and accurately explain their differences to others. 

This means that autistic people who might have a very spiky profile are
not singled out from other employees. It would also allow an employer to
pick up on any neurodiversity within a person, that may affect the
workplace straight away. 

This would be valuable because straight away, other members of the team
would be able to view the person's profile and know the best way to
communicate with them and what things are likely to cause difficulty
with a view to either mitigating against them or avoiding them. 

One thing that would have to be factored in though is that knowledge is
power and although it can help understanding other people to this
degree, it can also be used as a weapon. How people think about,
perceive, and sense the world can be used against them if such knowledge
got into the wrong hands.

But how much easier would it be if we were able to see 'inside'
somebody's head before working or interacting with them? This would be
possible with our neurodiversity profiling tool.

If handled correctly, many people, who would get dismissed due to
misunderstandings, could be retained. Simply by everyone understanding
everybody else\'s different ways of thinking, feeling, and perceiving. 

**For Linkedin**: Please let us know your thoughts in the comments.

**For Website**: Please let us know if you have any comments. Email
<info@aspiedent.com> or call 07717 404846.
