---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: How to do better in business by understanding (autistic) traits
tag: movie
date: New, 2021-11-08
image: /blog/social.jpg
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/Adjustments.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: Learning how to deal with people successfully, requires an understanding of human beings, human variation and how people tick.
segment: diagnosis
---
**How to do better in business by understanding (autistic) traits**

In Dale Carnegie's famous book: "How to win friends and influence
people", he says that if you want to live a richer, fuller and happier
life, then essentially you must have a deep, driving desire and vigorous
determination to increase your ability to **deal with people.**

Learning how to deal with people successfully, requires an understanding
of human beings, human variation and how people tick.

We advocate that if you want to study human beings and their behaviours,
then study autistic people!

Autistic people are not alien, their human traits (be it how good or bad
they naturally are at something, how interested they are in other things
or people, or how quickly or slowly they process certain information),
are just *more extreme.*

So arguably, if you want to understand and deal with other people (and
their resulting behaviour), you'll get more obvious examples of these
traits, what issues/benefits they might bring, and how to successfully
deal with these, in autistic people!

A well-known thing about the social world is that we generally judge
people based on what we can physically see, hear, and feel, etc. And we
do it quickly.

What often happens with hidden impairments like autism (and arguably
everybody to a certain extent) is that the person can present as one
thing, but underneath, something else is going on.

If you can master this, you may be much better at doing what Dale
Carnegie is famous for: winning friends and influencing people.

**How? Here is an example:**

You are a successful salesperson and you have landed an interview with a
successful CEO, to pitch your service. If you get the job, you are in
the money, big time. You will have made it.

***You go to their office to deliver your pitch. The following things
happen:***

During your first introductions, the CEO speaks to you in a monotone and
does not smile at you, nor does he shake your hand. In fact he does not
even look you in the eye. You feel uneasy.

Out of nervousness, mention that you had seen a bad crash on the
motorway on your way in, in which somebody was seriously injured. He
replies that he was glad it did not make you late, because he has
another meeting straight after you.

During your presentation, he stares blankly at you. No smiling, no
nodding, just a stern stare. In fact, it looks like they are thoroughly
unimpressed. You start willing for time to go faster. You assume that
they are uninterested, bored, even annoyed.

Eventually, the CEO does speak. But only to bluntly point out that your
math does not add up on your slide, and, by the way, there is a typo on
another. You lose your flow. You start to resent him. You feel
uncomfortable and you assume that they are uninterested in your product.

At the end of your presentation, when you are answering his questions,
he keeps interrupting you as soon as you start speaking, and it really
irritates you.

By this point, you have got so annoyed that you lose your cool and
decide that this is just not worth it. You put your defences up and
write the sale off. You get out of there. You do not want to work for
somebody so rude.

**So, what went wrong?**

It started off badly. Fair enough, he might not be the most cheerful
guy, but you have heard what they say about people who cannot look you
in the eye. You cannot trust them.

And seriously, as if he cares about his second meeting more than the
fact a family has been seriously injured on the motorway, maybe even
died. Does he not care about anyone else?

And was he making you feel uncomfortable on purpose by not showing any
interest when you were talking. OK, he might be in a bad mood, but why
even invite you in when he is not even going to engage with your
presentation?

And did he really need to point out my errors in the middle of your
presentation in the way he did. He could have left it to the end or
asked politely. Does he think he is above mistakes?

Why bother asking questions if he is just going to interrupt the whole
time?!

You kept forgetting what you were going to say, and you had some really
good points. Talk about pressure! The whole thing was a disaster and a
waste of time.

But could there have been a different (successful) outcome in the SAME
situation?

What if you had a far better understanding of the different, even weird
ways in which other people might tick? What if you understood the
variety in which people might come across and the underlying issues why?

Like Dale Carnegie indicates, if you had known, you perhaps could have
dealt with this situation much more successfully.

**Here is another way you could look at the exact same situation:**

Some people find making and maintaining eye contact so difficult, that
doing so is painful. Because of sensory issues, shaking hands can feel
like grabbing hold of a handful of worms. Perhaps the CEO was one of
these people.

If you already understood that this is an issue for some people and why,
perhaps you would have accepted his refusal to shake hands and not have
been phased by it. You would have been less likely to feel like you
started off on the wrong foot. Thus, not negatively affecting your
confidence in presenting from there on.

Processing issues may be something you have never heard of before, but
if you had learned in the past that some people struggle to process both
words and emotions at the same time, then you may have suspected that
this was the case here. That actually, they had not processed the
implications of what you were telling them about the awful motorway
crash, and only the non-emotional 'factual' information you gave them.
The emotion would hit them a few days later when you were long gone!

Another issue that is not uncommon is for people to not be able to both
concentrate on what others are saying, and make use pf facial gestures
or body language in a meaningful way at the same time.

By this point, you may have guessed that the CEO might be autistic and
that you are not dealing with somebody who is even able to read your
expressions.

At this point, instead of putting effort into 'appearing enthusiastic'
delivering your pitch, you relax into it, knowing that they are unlikely
to be judging you on your appearance. You start to do a better pitch.

When the CEO eventually does speak up to correct you on your maths error
and sentence typo, you have already figured that this person is not
being awkward, they probably genuinely believe they are doing you a
favour by point out your mistake.

Perhaps this CEOs knows you are likely to be delivering this pitch to
somebody else straight after them! You start to warm to the guy.

During the Q and A part of your presentation, you already understand
that this CEO probably has processing issues. Therefore, you leave a
long pause after they have finished asking you a question, as the
likelihood is that if you don't, he will catch up with what he was
thinking just as you have started answering his question, and appear to
rudely interrupt you when answering.

You have figured out how to deal with this CEO. You have quickly
understood how best to communicate with them. In fact, you rather like
it that that they behave the way they do. You know they will tell you
exactly what they are thinking and not waste your time pretending to
like the product and then ignore your phone calls afterwards for fear of
having to decline your offer.

You finish your meeting with a positive feeling and are open and ready
for the CEO to honestly tell you whether he is buying or not. In fact,
if you have got this far with him, there is a good chance he will.

If you had not understood his behaviour because you understand different
(even weird) ways in which people tick, you will have walked out on the
biggest sale of your career.
