---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Company Neurodiversity Inclusion - Where to start?
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: Jul 2, 2021, 11:45 AM
image: /assets/blog/WhereDoIStartNeurodiversityInitiatives.jpg
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/WhereDoIStartNeurodiversityInitiatives.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: This blog post is for good leaders who are passionate about neurodiversity inclusion in the workplace and need a bit of guidance as to where to start. It includes encouragement and some (hopefully) helpful & wise words regarding some of the issues you may face pulling off neurodiversity workplace inclusion.
segments: [education, employers, diagnosis, careers]
---
**Thumbnail image:** WhereDoIStartNeurodiversityInitiatives

**Image credit:** Image by [Gerd
Altmann](https://pixabay.com/users/geralt-9301/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=1777537) from [Pixabay](https://pixabay.com/?utm_source=link-attribution&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=image&utm_content=1777537) 

**Thumbnail title:** Company Neurodiversity Inclusion: Where to start?

**Thumbnail description:** This blog post is for good leaders who are
passionate about neurodiversity inclusion in the workplace and need a
bit of guidance as to where to start. It includes encouragement and some
(hopefully) helpful & wise words regarding some of the issues you may
face pulling off neurodiversity workplace inclusion.

**SEO (Meta) Title:** Company Neurodiversity Workplace Inclusion: Where
to start?

**SEO (Meta) Description:** Aspiedent's latest blog post is for
diversity and inclusion leaders who need a bit of encouragement and
support to implement a neurodiversity inclusion strategy.

**Title:** Company Neurodiversity Inclusion: Where to start?

Incorporating neurodiversity into inclusion and diversity agendas
=================================================================

One of the things I often hear is:

"*We love the idea of incorporating neurodiversity into our inclusion
and diversity agenda, but we do not know where to start*".

Hearing variations of the above has made me think. How can we better
help companies who have the right intentions regarding neurodiversity
and inclusion but have no idea how to make them a reality?

Disclaimer: before I dive into this topic, I must tell you that I have
never worked at a senior-level position in a large organisation.
Therefore some of what I cover may be a bit ignorant. That is not my
intention, and I welcome feedback from others that do have this
experience.

What I am offering is a realistic take on neurodiversity in the
workplace from an outsider\'s viewpoint. This viewpoint will hopefully
be a fresh and reasonably helpful perspective on the topic of
neurodiversity inclusion at work.

**Neurodiversity is different from other forms of diversity (although it
exists within them all).**

The above is the first thing to know if you are promoting neurodiversity
in your company.

Neurodiversity is not the same as other forms of diversity. In that,
people with neurodiversity tend to be disabled somehow, not simply
different. You may know this from your own experience.

However, some people may try and put you off the idea that
autistic/neurodiverse people are not disabled. If you ever feel
conflicted about this idea or challenged by it, chat to us (Aspiedent
CIC), as we might be able to help.

Please try not to get hooked in by the idea that neurodiverse people are
simply fine as they are, and like other forms of diversity (for example,
race and creed), are simply different. Also, neurodiversity affects
everyone equally regardless of nationality, religion, or skin colour.

I am not saying people with neurodiversity are 'less than'. I am saying
that they tend to have difficulties that society cannot accommodate
fully. True inclusivity relies on mutual understanding and acceptance of
both the 'normal' people' and 'neurodiverse' people.

It does not matter if it is disability in general, autism, or your
culture that creates a barrier to participating in mainstream society
and accessing opportunities. If you want to be part of society, you need
to take ownership and do what you can to help yourself fit in and get
along with other people. Of course, you have to be realistic about what
you can and cannot do -- and what you can do with some support, whether
that support is via software or human support.

In a nutshell, neurodiverse people are not just disabled by society (or
their workplace, for that matter). Recognising this is key to making any
autism or neurodiversity strategy work in a business.

**Do simple research.**

Before you do any work on a strategy - it is crucial to ask many within
the organisation for their input. An easy way for a web developer to go
wrong when developing a website for a business client, for example, is
to put all the work in to make it perfect and then present it to the
customer. The customer will often want to change it!

When developing a new neurodiversity initiative, you should create a
very minimally detailed strategy first. Then present it to interested
parties.

Get feedback/ideas/criticisms from these parties and then go back and
rethink/redesign. And then take it back for them to feed back on again.

Keep doing this as an iterative process backward and forward until you
get roughly positive feedback from everybody (and/or feedback becomes
contradictory). Then you have a minimal viable strategy to begin to
implement. Remember, this will change and will also never be 'finished'.
It is a living process, as much as running a business or running a
department in a company is.

Qualitative methods are popular in social research. However, qualitative
research methods can be either over or undervalued. I am confident there
is a place for fancy, wide-spread surveys. But what is wrong with
dropping into different departments and asking open questions about
their thoughts on neurodiversity (do they even know what it is?) What is
their view on how to be an organisation that actively makes space for
autistic/neurodiverse people?

You may get some unexpected and interesting answers that will inform
your direction. If the people 'on the ground' have had a say in it, any
strategy or agenda in place is more likely to be successful

**Send for help!**

Leading on from above, there is no shame in valuing and accepting
neurodiversity yet admitting that you do not know what it is! Not
understanding neurodiversity is, well, understandable. People have
different opinions about neurodiversity, and there is also a lot of
misunderstanding out there (for example, that autistic people are just
geniuses waiting to happen).

To get something really going, you need to understand how you will
define neurodiversity before doing anything. The best way to start this
process is to ask for some specialist help/training for yourself and
other key players.

It is not reasonable to expect yourself to lead on a neurodiversity
strategy without help. You may have personal experience with autism or
neurodiversity, which is why you are leading the project. However, that
only means you know your experiences of neurodiversity/autism.
Experiences vary massively from person to person and situation to
situation.

As part of your work, you will need to get others on board who do not
have experience with neurodiversity.

Those who do not have personal experience may be a harder sell. This
means you will have to learn about the topic from different
perspectives. Understanding how they feel will help you communicate in a
way that gets everybody excited for their reasons. Often, people do not
know that neurodiversity is relevant to themselves until they learn what
it is.

**Make autism & neurodiversity relevant to everybody. **

Leading on from the above, we often try and stress that neurodiversity
and autism inclusion is relevant to everyone in some way, shape, or
form. Everybody has quirks and difficulties, and nearly all if not all
of the recommendations made for autistic or neurodiverse employees would
be beneficial for the workplace as a whole.

We believe there needs to be a culture shift from the 'us and them', or
the 'autism' and 'normal' mentality. This mentality issue potentially
applies to all forms of diversity. It is just not as clear-cut as autism
being one thing and normal being another.

If we think of autism as this mysterious condition which nobody 'normal'
can relate to, then we are straight away shutting down the
conversations. As soon as something is not relevant or seems too
difficult to understand, people disengage.

Unfortunately, you will find that many people with differences or
disabilities tend to 'other' themselves. They may not consider
themselves to have anything in common with people they view as in the
majority.

There is not much you can do about this. However, there are plenty of
people with differences and disabilities who want to show other people
they have a lot in common with everyone else.

**Do not be disheartened by negative criticism.**

Again leading on from the last section, do not be put off if somebody
belittles your attempts at improving inclusion in this area. Even if
belittling comes from 'neurodiverse' people. Or people who identify as
neurodiverse. You are trying, which is an effort to be applauded.

There will be people who give constructive criticism, which is good. But
accept that you are never going to get this perfect, and if somebody
expects you to, then that is their problem. Ask them if they can do a
better job! It is impossible to please everybody regarding this topic
because there are so many different and often very strongly held views
about it.

Do not forget, however, that some people with autism cannot help being
blunt. So if you get some feedback about what you are doing that comes
across as abrasive, for example, take it simply as information to help
you do it better and not as an insult about you or your work.

Accept that you are never going to get it absolutely right, and go ahead
and do it. Do not let the fear of making mistakes hold you back from
trying to do good. I am confident you will find the journey as rewarding
as we do daily.

If you ever need a sounding board, a place to bat ideas around, or a
friendly listening ear who understands your challenges, please get in
touch. It helps me too as I can learn about your world that will, in
turn, help us be more relevant to our customers and help us better
advise autistic people regarding their careers. Call me, Jen, on 07717
404846 or email me at j.blacow\@aspiedent.com.
