---
layout: ../../layouts/BlogPost.astro
title: Autism, Change and Covid-19
tags: ['autism', 'neurodiversity', 'profile']
date: Jun 26, 2020, 2:19 PM
image: /assets/blog/Adjustments.jpg
thumbnail: /assets/blog/thumbnails/Adjustments.jpg
metaTitle: SEO Meta Title Goes Here
metaDescription: SEO meta description goes here.
author: [Jen Blacow]
authorImage: [jen]
description: This post explores ways in which social distancing due to the Covid-19 pandemic might help autistic people, but hinder non-autistic people.
segments: [diagnosis, careers, education, employers]
---
**Changes in the workplace due to COVID and autism. Title could be better.**

Jen Blacow Operations Manager, Aspiedent CIC

As people are slowly getting back to work, there will be government
guidelines to ensure employers keep their employees 'safe'.

What are the actual guidelines.

The actual guidelines are basically about social distancing and include

-   No hot desking -- everyone to have their own workstation.

-   Staggering when people come and go

-   One way systems, especially at entrance/exit

-   No canteen, but are allowed to supply packed lunches

-   Avoid people sitting face to face.

-   Increased hand washing and cleaning

-   Use of screens and barriers

-   Mental health support

-   As much homeworking as possible =\> video conferencing

-   Increased parking facilities

Issues people are likely to face

-   Shock at changed workplace

-   People they normally speak to not there

-   No social contact

-   Teams working in small "bubbles".

-   Smell of cleaning materials and soap for handwashing

-   Getting to and from work. May be problematic if have to use public
    transport and wear masks.

Everyone is going to struggle with the lack of social interaction and
inability to have impromptu private conversations.

Most people will welcome having their own workstation -- but can
employers accommodate? What will employers do who have switched to
hotdesking.

Most people will hate having to continue doing online conferencing
rather than face to face meetings.

Lack of canteen as a social place will be sorely missed.

Some of the changes will suit those who just want to come to work, do
their job and then go home.

-   Working further apart

-   Being able to continue working from home

-   Screens and barriers to separate people.

One way systems are likely to be quickly ignored -- just as they are in
shops. But there may be some who insist on them being adhered to.

"Blended working" might be worse than simply working from home. Many
people will be very disappointed by the lack of ability to interact
socially at work.

Working from home is not everyone one. Some are too easily distracted.
Some don't have anywhere suitable to work.

Having to bridge the "social distancing" gap will lead to more noise at
work, and fewer employees able to concentrate on their work.

Increased handwashing and cleaning will cause distraction. Some
employees will get very dry and cracked hands as a result of too much
handwashing.

With employees working from home, it may be difficult to separate work
and home.

Leaving aside the fact that this is health and safety gone completely
mad, we need to consider how this changes will affect neurodiverse
employees and other employees who dislike change (actually most of your
employees, we suspect).

First of this will depend on your particular employee.

You may have employees who are able to look at the actual government
data and who based on their analysis of this, think the whole thing is a
pile of rubbish. It will be difficult to convince these people that the
changes are actually necessary. They may want to insist that people wear
masks, but that will be difficult for any employees who rely on seeing
the mouth to help them understand what is being said.

Other employees may have become so scared by the government and the
media that they will be extremely anxious about coming back to work. For
them, no measures will be enough.

You may have employees who have always resented being crammed close
together, and who will welcome having to sit further apart.

One problem with "social distancing" is that quiet conversations with
people will no longer be possible. People will have to speak more loudly
to bridge the "social distancing" gap. This will reduce privacy because
more people will hear the conversation.

Changes in staff who are there may cause problems. The threat of
redundancies will create a lot of anxiety.

Summary: the guidelines will take all the joy of being at work for some
people, others will welcome just coming to work, doing their work, and
going home. The latter will want to come to work because it separates
work and home.

All the above is about the impact of the changes, but how about
preparing people for the changes? Many will think that a return to work
is a return to normality. This will hit everyone, not just autistic
people.

Best thing to do is to prepare people. Send them pictures of the new
layout and tell them where their desk will be. Provide a plan of the one
way system in advance. Allow those who are particularly anxious to visit
first.

Explain how the workplace will operate in advance and ask for
suggestions as to how it could be made better. Be prepared for a lot of
grumbling -- and questioning.

There will be issues around deciding who can come in to work and who has
to work at home. There may resentment towards those who are actually at
work from those who do not come into work.

Let's face it if the space is not big enough for all employees to be
there, decisions are going to have to be made regarding who comes to
work and who stays at home. It will not be possible to have some in at
some times and others in at others times if hot desking is not allowed.

The key problem is how to maintain working relationships long term. Work
is a social environment and online conferencing is no substitute.

**People need social interaction in order to stay healthy mentally. The
best thing you can do for the mental health of your employees is to
provide them with the data and the facts that can be drawn simply from
the official government data and ignore the guidelines! But not sure we
are allowed to say this.**

**Perhaps better written as a short story.**

To read more about Aspiedent's approach to disability and our work,
please visit
<https://aspiedent.org/index.php/autism-information/approach-disability>.

To chat to me about this further, please get in touch.

Autism, Change and Covid-19
===========================

Jen Blacow Operations Manager, Aspiedent CIC

I never thought I would be saying that a worldwide Pandemic was the
thing that came along and made traditional workplaces potentially easier
to handle for autistic people. The downside is that it may make it less
suitable for many non-autistic folks. Of course, it really depends on
individual employees. But consider this...

Autism is described as a social communication disability. Generally,
people with autism struggle with other people in some way, shape or
form. The government guidelines for employers to make workplaces 'safe'
are basically about social distancing and include

No Hot desking! Everyone to have their own workstation.
-------------------------------------------------------

Aspiedent once worked with an autistic employee who had difficulties
because at his new job, his office had adopted 'hot-desking' practice.
He was upset to find that in reality, there were 'unwritten rules' as to
who's (hot)desk belonged to whom. Naturally, this type of thing can be
really confusing to an autistic person who struggles with nuance, sticks
to rules rigidly and takes things literally, as some (but not all) do.

So, I suppose hooray for him, no more confusion!

Staggering when people come and go into the workplace
-----------------------------------------------------

Leaving aside new changes such as homeworking, better mental health
support and one-way systems (hence, no more unpredictable movement),
there are now calls to stagger work start times. Another autistic
employee we once helped had major sensory issues (hypersensitivity to
movement and noise). It was so severe that after his train journey into
Leeds Centre to come to work, he often had to be treated for physical
shock due to the impact of being confined on a busy train during rush
hour for half an hour.

But no more busy trains, stations, and pavements for him now... bonus!

Use of screens and barriers - avoid sitting people face to face 
----------------------------------------------------------------

Sometimes, the reasonable adjustments that we recommend employers make
for autistic people due to difficulties with sound, noise, and
information overload, are to install barriers and screens between them
and others. This can minimise the noise and disruption to the person.
However occasionally the employer gives us the impression that this
might be a challenging and/or expensive adjustment to implement.

...But wait, now this is seen as standard?!

Well, it has been a pleasure, but Aspiedent might as well pack up and go
home now.

Well, not quite. 
-----------------

'Change' is well known to be a challenge in the workplace for many.
Indeed, there is a whole academic domain on change management (my
master's degree in Human Resource Management revealed this rather
surprising fact to me).

Basically, aside from *extreme* difficulties with change being a common
problem for people with autism, nearly everybody, autistic or not
autistic, struggles with change!

Forgetting the fact that the workplace guidelines are health and safety
overload (viruses are so tiny that they tend to hang about in the air
for you to bump into and are quite partial to sticking to plastic
screens rendering social distancing a bit pointless) how will these
changes affect neurodiverse employees (and actually most employees, we
suspect) who dislike change? This a key concern for us.

How So?
-------

Well, for example, you may have autistic (or just otherwise minded)
employees who can analyse complex data with ease. Those who are able to
look at the actual government data and, who based on their analysis of
this data, see the whole public panic is an overaction.

It will be difficult to convince these types of people that the changes
are actually necessary: they may be genuinely upset by the illogicality
of the measures being put in place to stay 'safe'. Indeed, they may
argue that it is not possible to 'stay safe'.

Indeed, workplaces may also insist that people wear masks. But that will
be difficult for some employees, for example those hard of hearing and
who rely on seeing the mouth to help them understand what is being said.
Other employees may have read up on the actual evidence and concluded
that masks are likely to do more harm than good.

Other employees (perhaps those with 'contamination OCD') may have become
so scared by the government and the media that they will be extremely
anxious about coming back to work. For them, no measures will be enough!
They literally fear they are going to die and marching them back to the
workplace to them feels equivalent to asking them to walk the plank!

Changes in staff who are physically there may also cause problems. And
of course, the threat of redundancies or reduced hours will create a lot
of general anxiety.

**On the Flip Side **
---------------------

Nonetheless, most people will welcome having their own workstation,
including those autistic people with sensory issues. You may have always
had employees who have forever resented being crammed close together,
and who will welcome having to sit further apart.

We have met a few people, including our autistic Director, who would
quite like it if they had the kind of job where they could just turn up
and get on with it. Those who have always socially distanced themselves
to an extent.

Some people are hyper-sensitive to other people's emotions which
increases stress. Emotion does not go through screens, either! Another
Bonus!

**Autism, People and Covid-19 Changes **

To put it simply, we doubt autistic people will have a harder time with
the changes than anyone else. This is going to be tough for everyone.
For example, everyone is going to struggle with the lack of social
interaction and inability to have impromptu, private conversations.

Covid-19 has inadvertently made workplaces more autism friendly for some
and potentially harder for some non-autistic people. The new guidelines
will potentially take away all the joy of being at work for some people,
while others will welcome the idea of just coming to work, doing their
work with minimal interaction, and going home.

The latter will want to come to work because it separates work and home.

In summary, anyone who dislikes change (which is most people) will
struggle

The points made in this article are no way near exhaustive.

But if you would like to know more about what you can do to look after
the mental health of your employees as best as you can, including
employees on the autistic spectrum (you may have many and you will
likely have some), get in touch and we will be happy to discuss how we
can help.

To read more about Aspiedent's work, please visit
[www.aspiedent.com](http://www.aspiedent.com)

To chat to me about this further, please get in touch with me, Jen on
j.blacow\@aspiedent.com.
